04_validation.adoc, before:

= Validation
include::settings.adoc[]

== Transaction validation

We can follow most of the journey of a transaction through Bitcoin Core by following glozow's notes on transaction https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[Validation and submission to the mempool].
glozow details what different types of checks are run on a new transaction before it's accepted into the nodes local mempool -- consensus vs policy, script vs non-script, contextual vs context-free.

glozow continues with sections on P2P transaction relay, orphans and mining, but more relevant to consensus is the following section, https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#block-validation[Block Validation], which describes the consensus checks performed on newly-learned blocks, specifically:

[quote,glozow]
____
Since v0.8, Bitcoin Core nodes have used a https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/1677[UTXO set] rather than blockchain lookups to represent state and validate transactions.
To fully validate new blocks nodes only need to consult their UTXO set and knowledge of the current consensus rules.
Since consensus rules depend on block height and time (both of which can *decrease* during a reorg), they are recalculated for each block prior to validation.

Regardless of whether or not transactions have already been previously validated and accepted to the mempool, nodes check block-wide consensus rules (e.g. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1935[total sigop cost], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1778-L1866[duplicate transactions], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L3172-L3179[timestamps], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L3229-L3255[witness commitments] https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1965-L1969[block subsidy amount]) and transaction-wide consensus rules (e.g. availability of inputs, locktimes, and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1946[input scripts]) for each block.

Script checking is parallelized in block validation. Block transactions are checked in order (and coins set updated which allows for dependencies within the block), but input script checks are parallelizable. They are added to a https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1887[work queue] delegated to a set of threads while the main validation thread is working on other things.
While failures should be rare - creating a valid proof of work for an invalid block is quite expensive - any consensus failure on a transaction invalidates the entire block, so no state changes are saved until these threads successfully complete.

If the node already validated a transaction before it was included in a block, no consensus rules have changed, and the script cache has not evicted this transaction's entry, it doesn't need to run script checks again - it just https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/1a369f006fd0bec373b95001ed84b480e852f191/src/validation.cpp#L1419-L1430[uses the script cache]!
____

The section on https://github.com/chaincodelabs/bitcoin-core-onboarding/tree/main/1.0_bitcoin_core_architecture.asciidoc#script-verification[script verification] also highlights how the script interpreter is called from at least 3 distinct sites within the codebase:

[quote]
____
* when the node https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/net_processing.cpp#L3001[receives a new transaction].

* when the https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/node/transaction.cpp#L29[node wants to broadcast a new transaction].

* when https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/net_processing.cpp#L3529[receiving a new block]
____

Having considered both transactions that were already known about (in the mempool), and any new transactions that were first learned about in the block itself (as part of block validation), we now understand both ways a transaction can be deemed consensus-valid.

== Multiple chains

TODO: Reorgs, undo data, `DisconnectBlock`

Bitcoin nodes should ultimately converge in consensus on the most-work chain.
Being able to track and monitor multiple chain (tips) concurrently is a key requirement for this to take place.
There are a number of different states which the client must be able to handle:

. A single, most-work chain being followed
. Stale blocks learned about but not used
. Full reorganisation from one chain tip to another

`BlockManager` is tasked with maintaining a tree of all blocks learned about, along with their total work so that the most-work chain can be quickly determined.

`CChainState` is responsible for updating our local view of the best tip, including reading and writing blocks to disk, and updating the UTXO set.
A single `BlockManager` is shared between all instances of `CChainState`.

`ChainstateManager` is tasked with managing multiple ``CChainState``s.
Currently just a "regular" IBD chainstate and an optional snapshot chainstate, which might in the future be used as part of the https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/assumeutxo/[assumeUTXO] project.

When a new block is learned about (from `src/net_processing.cpp`) it will call into ``ChainstateManager``s `ProcessNewBlockHeaders` method to validate it.

== Exercises

[qanda]
What is the difference between contextual and context-free validation checks?::
Contextual checks require some knowledge of the current "state", e.g. ChainState, chain tip or UTXO set.
+
Context-free checks only require the information required in the transaction itself.
+
See {glozow-tx-mempool-validation}[glozow-tx-mempool-validation] for more info.

What are some examples of each?::
context-free:
+
. `tx.isCoinbase()`
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/consensus/tx_check.cpp#L25-L28[0 &#8804; tx_value &#8804; MAX_MONEY]
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/policy/policy.cpp#L88[tx not overweight]

+
contextual: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/validation.cpp#L671-L692[check inputs are available]

In which function(s) do UTXO-related validity checks happen?::
`ConnectBlock()`

What type of validation checks are `CheckBlockHeader()` and `CheckBlock()` performing?::
context-free

Which class is in charge of managing the current blockchain?::
`ChainstateManager()`

Which class is in charge of managing the UTXO set?::
`CCoinsViews()`

Which functions are called when a longer chain is found that we need to re-org onto?::
TODO

Are there any areas of the codebase where the same consensus or validation checks are performed twice?::
Again see https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[glozows notes] for examples

Why does `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache` exist?::
To prevent us from re-checking the scripts of transactions already in our mempool during consensus validation on learning about a new block

Which function(s) are in charge of validating the merkle root of a block?::
`BlockMerkleRoot()` and `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()` construct a vector of merkle leaves, which is then passed to `ComputeMerkleRoot()` for calculation.
// TODO: Calculate the merkle root of a sample block

Can you find any evidence (e.g. PRs) which have been made in an effort to modularize consensus code?::
A few examples: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10279[#10279], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158[#20158]

What is the function of `BlockManager()`?::
It manages the current most-work chaintip and pruning of unneeded blocks (`\*.blk`) and associated undo (`*.rev`) files

What stops a malicious node from sending multiple invalid headers to try and use up a nodes' disk space? (hint: these might be stored in `BlockManager.m_failed_blocks`)::
Even invalid headers would need a valid proof of work which would be too costly to construct for a spammer

Which functions are responsible for writing consensus-valid blocks to disk?::
TODO: answer

Are there any other components to Bitcoin Core which, similarly to the block storage database, are not themselves performing validation but can still be consensus-critical?::
Not sure myself, sounds like an interesting question though!

In which module (and class) is signature verification handled?::
`src/script/interpreter.cpp#BaseSignatureChecker`

Which function is used to calculate the Merkle root of a block, and from where is it called?::
`src/consensus/merkle.cpp#ComputeMerkleRoot` is used to compute the merkle root.
+
It is called from `src/chainparams.cpp#CreateGenesisBlock`, `src/miner.cpp#IncrementExtraNonce` & `src/miner.cpp#RegenerateCommitments` and from `src/validation.cpp#CheckBlock` to validate incoming blocks.

Practical question on Merkle root calculation::
TODO, add exercise

== Removed text

The outline of the mechanism at work is that a node relaying a transaction can slightly modify the signature in a way which is still acceptable to the underlying OpenSSL module.
Once the signature has been changed, the transaction ID (hash) will also change.
If the modified transaction is then included in a block, before the original, the effect is that the sender will still see the outgoing transaction as "unconfirmed" in their wallet.
The sender wallet should however also see the accepted (modified) outgoing transaction, so their balance will be calculated correctly, only a "stuck doublespend" will pollute their wallet.
The receiver will not perceive anything unordinary, unless they were tracking the incoming payment using the txid as given to them by the sender.

Commit message:

Add general bitcoin core commit hash
Allows people to more easily know where they should browse the repo in
order to explore.

04_validation.adoc, after:

= Validation
include::settings.adoc[]

This document was created from Bitcoin Core at commit https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e[4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e]

== Transaction validation

We can follow most of the journey of a transaction through Bitcoin Core by following glozow's notes on transaction https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[Validation and submission to the mempool].
glozow details what different types of checks are run on a new transaction before it's accepted into the nodes local mempool -- consensus vs policy, script vs non-script, contextual vs context-free.

glozow continues with sections on P2P transaction relay, orphans and mining, but more relevant to consensus is the following section, https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#block-validation[Block Validation], which describes the consensus checks performed on newly-learned blocks, specifically:

[quote,glozow]
____
Since v0.8, Bitcoin Core nodes have used a https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/1677[UTXO set] rather than blockchain lookups to represent state and validate transactions.
To fully validate new blocks nodes only need to consult their UTXO set and knowledge of the current consensus rules.
Since consensus rules depend on block height and time (both of which can *decrease* during a reorg), they are recalculated for each block prior to validation.

Regardless of whether or not transactions have already been previously validated and accepted to the mempool, nodes check block-wide consensus rules (e.g. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1935[total sigop cost], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1778-L1866[duplicate transactions], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L3172-L3179[timestamps], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L3229-L3255[witness commitments] https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1965-L1969[block subsidy amount]) and transaction-wide consensus rules (e.g. availability of inputs, locktimes, and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1946[input scripts]) for each block.

Script checking is parallelized in block validation. Block transactions are checked in order (and coins set updated which allows for dependencies within the block), but input script checks are parallelizable. They are added to a https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/9df1906091f84d9a3a2e953a0424a88e0931ea33/src/validation.cpp#L1887[work queue] delegated to a set of threads while the main validation thread is working on other things.
While failures should be rare - creating a valid proof of work for an invalid block is quite expensive - any consensus failure on a transaction invalidates the entire block, so no state changes are saved until these threads successfully complete.

If the node already validated a transaction before it was included in a block, no consensus rules have changed, and the script cache has not evicted this transaction's entry, it doesn't need to run script checks again - it just https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/1a369f006fd0bec373b95001ed84b480e852f191/src/validation.cpp#L1419-L1430[uses the script cache]!
____

The section on https://github.com/chaincodelabs/bitcoin-core-onboarding/tree/main/1.0_bitcoin_core_architecture.asciidoc#script-verification[script verification] also highlights how the script interpreter is called from at least 3 distinct sites within the codebase:

[quote]
____
* when the node https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/net_processing.cpp#L3001[receives a new transaction].

* when the https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/node/transaction.cpp#L29[node wants to broadcast a new transaction].

* when https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/net_processing.cpp#L3529[receiving a new block]
____

Having considered both transactions that were already known about (in the mempool), and any new transactions that were first learned about in the block itself (as part of block validation), we now understand both ways a transaction can be deemed consensus-valid.

== Multiple chains

TODO: Reorgs, undo data, `DisconnectBlock`

Bitcoin nodes should ultimately converge in consensus on the most-work chain.
Being able to track and monitor multiple chain (tips) concurrently is a key requirement for this to take place.
There are a number of different states which the client must be able to handle:

. A single, most-work chain being followed
. Stale blocks learned about but not used
. Full reorganisation from one chain tip to another

`BlockManager` is tasked with maintaining a tree of all blocks learned about, along with their total work so that the most-work chain can be quickly determined.

`CChainState` is responsible for updating our local view of the best tip, including reading and writing blocks to disk, and updating the UTXO set.
A single `BlockManager` is shared between all instances of `CChainState`.

`ChainstateManager` is tasked with managing multiple ``CChainState``s.
Currently just a "regular" IBD chainstate and an optional snapshot chainstate, which might in the future be used as part of the https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/assumeutxo/[assumeUTXO] project.

When a new block is learned about (from `src/net_processing.cpp`) it will call into ``ChainstateManager``s `ProcessNewBlockHeaders` method to validate it.

== Exercises

[qanda]
What is the difference between contextual and context-free validation checks?::
Contextual checks require some knowledge of the current "state", e.g. ChainState, chain tip or UTXO set.
+
Context-free checks only require the information required in the transaction itself.
+
See {glozow-tx-mempool-validation}[glozow-tx-mempool-validation] for more info.

What are some examples of each?::
context-free:
+
. `tx.isCoinbase()`
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/consensus/tx_check.cpp#L25-L28[0 &#8804; tx_value &#8804; MAX_MONEY]
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/policy/policy.cpp#L88[tx not overweight]

+
contextual: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/validation.cpp#L671-L692[check inputs are available]

In which function(s) do UTXO-related validity checks happen?::
`ConnectBlock()`

What type of validation checks are `CheckBlockHeader()` and `CheckBlock()` performing?::
context-free

Which class is in charge of managing the current blockchain?::
`ChainstateManager()`

Which class is in charge of managing the UTXO set?::
`CCoinsViews()`

Which functions are called when a longer chain is found that we need to re-org onto?::
TODO

Are there any areas of the codebase where the same consensus or validation checks are performed twice?::
Again see https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[glozows notes] for examples

Why does `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache` exist?::
To prevent us from re-checking the scripts of transactions already in our mempool during consensus validation on learning about a new block

Which function(s) are in charge of validating the merkle root of a block?::
`BlockMerkleRoot()` and `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()` construct a vector of merkle leaves, which is then passed to `ComputeMerkleRoot()` for calculation.
// TODO: Calculate the merkle root of a sample block

Can you find any evidence (e.g. PRs) which have been made in an effort to modularize consensus code?::
A few examples: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10279[#10279], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158[#20158]

What is the function of `BlockManager()`?::
It manages the current most-work chaintip and pruning of unneeded blocks (`\*.blk`) and associated undo (`*.rev`) files

What stops a malicious node from sending multiple invalid headers to try and use up a nodes' disk space? (hint: these might be stored in `BlockManager.m_failed_blocks`)::
Even invalid headers would need a valid proof of work which would be too costly to construct for a spammer

Which functions are responsible for writing consensus-valid blocks to disk?::
TODO: answer

Are there any other components to Bitcoin Core which, similarly to the block storage database, are not themselves performing validation but can still be consensus-critical?::
Not sure myself, sounds like an interesting question though!

In which module (and class) is signature verification handled?::
`src/script/interpreter.cpp#BaseSignatureChecker`

Which function is used to calculate the Merkle root of a block, and from where is it called?::
`src/consensus/merkle.cpp#ComputeMerkleRoot` is used to compute the merkle root.
+
It is called from `src/chainparams.cpp#CreateGenesisBlock`, `src/miner.cpp#IncrementExtraNonce` & `src/miner.cpp#RegenerateCommitments` and from `src/validation.cpp#CheckBlock` to validate incoming blocks.

Practical question on Merkle root calculation::
TODO, add exercise

== Removed text

The outline of the mechanism at work is that a node relaying a transaction can slightly modify the signature in a way which is still acceptable to the underlying OpenSSL module.
Once the signature has been changed, the transaction ID (hash) will also change.
If the modified transaction is then included in a block, before the original, the effect is that the sender will still see the outgoing transaction as "unconfirmed" in their wallet.
The sender wallet should however also see the accepted (modified) outgoing transaction, so their balance will be calculated correctly, only a "stuck doublespend" will pollute their wallet.
The receiver will not perceive anything unordinary, unless they were tracking the incoming payment using the txid as given to them by the sender.
