06_gui.adoc, before:

= GUI
include::settings.adoc[]

The GUI has its own separate repo at https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui[bitcoin-core/gui].
Pull requests which primarily target the GUI should be made here, and then they will get merged into the primary repo.
Developer Marco Falke created https://github.com/MarcoFalke/bitcoin-core/issues/26[an issue] in his fork which detailed some of the rationale for the split, but essentially it came down to:

. Separate issue and patch management
. More focused review and interests
. Maintain high quality assurance

He also stated that:

[quote, Marco Falke]
____
Splitting up the GUI (and splitting out modules in general) has been brought up often in recent years. Now that the GUI is primarily connected through interfaces with a bitcoin node, it seems an appropriate time to revive this discussion.
____

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19071[PR 19071] contained the documentation change now contained in the Bitcoin Core primary repository, along with details of the monotree approach that was ultimately taken.
The documentation change provides guidance on what a "GUI change" is: 

[quote, src/CONTRIBUTING.md]
____
As a rule of thumb, everything that only modifies `src/qt` is a GUI-only pull
request. However:

* For global refactoring or other transversal changes the node repository
  should be used.
* For GUI-related build system changes, the node repository should be used
  because the change needs review by the build systems reviewers.
* Changes in `src/interfaces` need to go to the node repository because they
  might affect other components like the wallet.

For large GUI changes that include build system and interface changes, it is
recommended to first open a pull request against the GUI repository. When there
is agreement to proceed with the changes, a pull request with the build system
and interfaces changes can be submitted to the node repository.
____

On a related note, another https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/24045[issue] was recently opened by Marco, to discuss the possibility of instituting the same monotree changes for wallet code.

== Building the GUI

`bitcoin-qt`, which is the GUI version of the node software, is built automatically when the build dependencies are met.
Required packages can be found in the build instructions in _src/doc/build-*.md_ as appropriate for your platform.
If you have the required packages installed but do not wish to build the `bitcoin-qt` then you must run `./configure` with the option `--with-gui=no`.

[NOTE]
====
If the build is configured with `--enable-multiprocess` then additional binaries will be built:

. `bitcoin-node`
. `bitcoin-wallet`
. `bitcoin-gui`
====

== QT

We can see how the QT directory is related to the rest of the codebase from its directory dependency graph:

image::dir_f0c29a9f5764d78706f34c972e8114d8_dep.svg[]

Developers would ideally like to reduce these dependencies even further.

== QT documentation

There is useful documentation for developers looking to contribute to the QT side of the codebase found at https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki//Developer-Notes-for-Qt-Code[Developer Notes for Qt Code].

== Main GUI program

The loading point for the GUI is _src/qt/main.cpp_.
`main()` calls `GuiMain()` from _src/qt/bitcoin.cpp_, passing along any program arguments with it.
`GuiMain` starts by calling `SetupEnvironment()` which amongst other things, configures the runtime locale and charset.
Note that `SetupEnvironment` is called from all major components:

image::setup_environment.png[]

Next an empty `NodeContext` is setup, which is then populated into a fully-fledged node interface via being passed to `interfaces::MakeNode()`, which returns an `interfaces::Node`.

Various signal handlers are configured:

* `ThreadSafeMessageBox_connect` enables a box to be shown to the user
* `ThreadSafeQuestion_connect` enables a question to be asked to the user
* `InitMessage_connect` shows a message during process initialisation

These signals are defined via macro and we can see that after replacement, each signal is a reference to a `CClientUIInterface` signal:

.src/node/ui_interface.cpp
[source]
----
#define ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(signal_name)                                                                 \
    boost::signals2::connection CClientUIInterface::signal_name##_connect(std::function<signal_name##Sig> fn) \
    {                                                                                                         \
        return g_ui_signals.signal_name.connect(fn);                                                          \
    }

ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ThreadSafeMessageBox);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ThreadSafeQuestion);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(InitMessage);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyNumConnectionsChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyNetworkActiveChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyAlertChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ShowProgress);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyBlockTip);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyHeaderTip);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(BannedListChanged);
----

Commit message:

Add general bitcoin core commit hash
Allows people to more easily know where they should browse the repo in
order to explore.

06_gui.adoc, after:

= GUI
include::settings.adoc[]

This document was created from Bitcoin Core at commit https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e[4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e]

The GUI has its own separate repo at https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui[bitcoin-core/gui].
Pull requests which primarily target the GUI should be made here, and then they will get merged into the primary repo.
Developer Marco Falke created https://github.com/MarcoFalke/bitcoin-core/issues/26[an issue] in his fork which detailed some of the rationale for the split, but essentially it came down to:

. Separate issue and patch management
. More focused review and interests
. Maintain high quality assurance

He also stated that:

[quote, Marco Falke]
____
Splitting up the GUI (and splitting out modules in general) has been brought up often in recent years. Now that the GUI is primarily connected through interfaces with a bitcoin node, it seems an appropriate time to revive this discussion.
____

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19071[PR 19071] contained the documentation change now contained in the Bitcoin Core primary repository, along with details of the monotree approach that was ultimately taken.
The documentation change provides guidance on what a "GUI change" is: 

[quote, src/CONTRIBUTING.md]
____
As a rule of thumb, everything that only modifies `src/qt` is a GUI-only pull
request. However:

* For global refactoring or other transversal changes the node repository
  should be used.
* For GUI-related build system changes, the node repository should be used
  because the change needs review by the build systems reviewers.
* Changes in `src/interfaces` need to go to the node repository because they
  might affect other components like the wallet.

For large GUI changes that include build system and interface changes, it is
recommended to first open a pull request against the GUI repository. When there
is agreement to proceed with the changes, a pull request with the build system
and interfaces changes can be submitted to the node repository.
____

On a related note, another https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/24045[issue] was recently opened by Marco, to discuss the possibility of instituting the same monotree changes for wallet code.

== Building the GUI

`bitcoin-qt`, which is the GUI version of the node software, is built automatically when the build dependencies are met.
Required packages can be found in the build instructions in _src/doc/build-*.md_ as appropriate for your platform.
If you have the required packages installed but do not wish to build the `bitcoin-qt` then you must run `./configure` with the option `--with-gui=no`.

[NOTE]
====
If the build is configured with `--enable-multiprocess` then additional binaries will be built:

. `bitcoin-node`
. `bitcoin-wallet`
. `bitcoin-gui`
====

== QT

We can see how the QT directory is related to the rest of the codebase from its directory dependency graph:

image::dir_f0c29a9f5764d78706f34c972e8114d8_dep.svg[]

Developers would ideally like to reduce these dependencies even further.

== QT documentation

There is useful documentation for developers looking to contribute to the QT side of the codebase found at https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki//Developer-Notes-for-Qt-Code[Developer Notes for Qt Code].

== Main GUI program

The loading point for the GUI is _src/qt/main.cpp_.
`main()` calls `GuiMain()` from _src/qt/bitcoin.cpp_, passing along any program arguments with it.
`GuiMain` starts by calling `SetupEnvironment()` which amongst other things, configures the runtime locale and charset.
Note that `SetupEnvironment` is called from all major components:

image::setup_environment.png[]

Next an empty `NodeContext` is setup, which is then populated into a fully-fledged node interface via being passed to `interfaces::MakeNode()`, which returns an `interfaces::Node`.

Various signal handlers are configured:

* `ThreadSafeMessageBox_connect` enables a box to be shown to the user
* `ThreadSafeQuestion_connect` enables a question to be asked to the user
* `InitMessage_connect` shows a message during process initialisation

These signals are defined via macro and we can see that after replacement, each signal is a reference to a `CClientUIInterface` signal:

.src/node/ui_interface.cpp
[source]
----
#define ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(signal_name)                                                                 \
    boost::signals2::connection CClientUIInterface::signal_name##_connect(std::function<signal_name##Sig> fn) \
    {                                                                                                         \
        return g_ui_signals.signal_name.connect(fn);                                                          \
    }

ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ThreadSafeMessageBox);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ThreadSafeQuestion);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(InitMessage);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyNumConnectionsChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyNetworkActiveChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyAlertChanged);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(ShowProgress);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyBlockTip);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(NotifyHeaderTip);
ADD_SIGNALS_IMPL_WRAPPER(BannedListChanged);
----
