addition-removal-mempool.adoc, before:

:page-title: Additional and removal of transactions
:page-nav_order: 30
:page-parent: Mempool
:mermaid-puppeteer-config: ./puppeteer-config.json
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Addition to the mempool

Transactions are added to the mempool via `addUnchecked()` as part of the `AcceptToMemoryPool()` flow.
See <<{transaction-validation}transaction_validation>> for more information on how this flow is entered.

WARNING: The function name `addUnchecked` specifically refers to the fact that no checks are being performed, so this must not be called until policy checks have passed.

This function is called from within _validation.cpp_ (`MemPoolAccept::Finalize()`) where the appropriate consensus and policy checks _have_ already been performed on the transaction.
The transaction is added to the primary index `mapTx` before any fee prioritisation ("delta") is applied to it.

Next any links to parent transactions are generated by looping through the inputs and mapping the `COutPoint` of the input to this transaction `CTransaction` in the `mapNextTx` map.
Additionally the tx input is added to a set which is used to update parent transactions if they are still in the mempool.

After all inputs have been considered, `UpdateAncestorsOf()` is called which will add this transaction as a descendant to any ancestors in the mempool.
This is followed by `UpdateEntryForAncestors()` which will re-calculate and apply descendant `count`, `size`, `fee` and `sigOpCost` of the ancestors with the new descendant being accounted for.

Finally update `totalTxSize` and `totalFee` (both sum totals of the mempool) to account for this new transaction.

////
Every entry in the mempool contains a transaction, metadata such as the time it was received, fees rates, optional block height and/or time needed to satisfy timelocks, and optional pointers to any ancestors and descendants in the mempool.

Much of the mempool is devoted to keeping track of a transaction's in-mempool ancestors and descendants and their aggregated fees.
A transaction is only valid if its ancestors exist, otherwise it is considered an orphan.
If a transaction is evicted from the mempool, its descendants must be too.

As such, a transaction's effective feerate is not just its base feerate divided by weight, but that of itself and all of its ancestors.
This information is also taken into account when the mempool fills up and the node must choose which transactions to evict (also based on fees).
Of course, all of this information can be calculated on the fly, but constructing a block is extremely time-sensitive, so the mempool opts to cache this information rather than spend more time calculating it.
As one might imagine, the family DAGs can get quite hairy and a source of resource exhaustion, so one part of mempool policy is to limit individual transactions' connectivity.

////

== Removal from the mempool

Transactions are removed from the mempool for a number of reasons:

. A new block has been connected `removeForBlock()`
. A re-org is taking place `removeForReorg()`
. The transaction has <<{mempool-lifecycle}default_mempool_expire,expired>> `Expire()`
. The transaction is being replaced by a higher-fee version `MemPoolAccept::Finalize()`
. The mempool must be trimmed back down below its maximum size `TrimToSize()`

.Removal from the mempool
[mermaid,target=mempool-removal,format=svg,align="center"]
....
flowchart LR
    remove_staged["RemoveStaged()"]
    remove_recursive["removeRecursive()"]
    remove_reorg["removeForReorg()"]
    remove_block["removeForBlock()"]
    expire["Expire()"]
    trim_to_size["TrimToSize()"]
    finalize["MemPoolAccept::Finalize()"]
    calculate_ancestors["CalculateMemPoolAncestors()"]
    update_ancestors["UpdateAncestorsOf()"]
    update_children["UpdateChildrenForRemoval()"]
    remove_unchecked["removeUnchecked()"]
    
    remove_recursive --> remove_staged
    remove_reorg --> remove_staged
    remove_block --> remove_staged
    expire --> remove_staged
    trim_to_size --> remove_staged
    finalize ---> remove_staged
    
    remove_staged --> update_for_remove

    update_for_remove --> remove_unchecked
    
    subgraph validation.cpp
        finalize
    end
    
    subgraph txmempool.cpp
        remove_recursive
        remove_reorg
        remove_block
        expire
        trim_to_size
    end
    
    subgraph update_for_remove["UpdateForRemoveFromMempool()"]
        calculate_ancestors --> update_ancestors --> update_children
    end
....

`RemoveStaged()` takes a set of transactions referenced by their txid along with their https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/txmempool.h#L347-L354[removal reason], and removes them sequentially.
It does this by first updating the ancestors of the transaction, followed by the descendants.
After calculating and updating related transaction information it calls `removeUnchecked()` which actions the removal from the mempool.

`removeUnchecked()` starts by notifying the validation interface that a transaction has been removed from the mempool for all reasons other than a new block arriving, as there is a different `BlockConnected` signal which can be used for that.

Next it loops over the ``txin``s of the transaction, and removes each `prevout` of each `txin` from the `mapNextTx` map.

[TIP]
====
`mapNextTx` is used to map a `COutPoint` to the unconfirmed transaction spending it.
This way there is a quick lookup available to check that a new transaction being added to the mempool is not trying to double spend a UTXO.

You can see the map being created as new transactions are learned about in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/txmempool.cpp#L510[`addUnchecked()`].
====

If the node has upgraded to SegWit the `vTxHashes` vector, which stores ``wtxid``s is then updated.
As `vTxHashes` stores the ``wtxid``s in random order, first we move the transaction's entry to the back, and then pop it off, resizing the vector if needed.

Finally, as with `addUnchecked()` we update the mempool sum totals for `txSize` and `fee` and erase the transaction from the primary mempool index `mapTx`.

TIP: Both adding and removing transactions increment the `mempool_seqence` counter.
This is used by the `getrawmempool` RPC (via `MempoolToJSON`) in tracking the number of mempool database transaction operations.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

addition-removal-mempool.adoc, after:

:page-title: Addition and removal of transactions
:page-nav_order: 30
:page-parent: Mempool
:mermaid-puppeteer-config: ./puppeteer-config.json
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Addition to the mempool

Transactions are added to the mempool via `addUnchecked()` as part of the `AcceptToMemoryPool()` flow.
See xref:transaction-validation.adoc[Transaction validation] for more information on how this flow is entered.

WARNING: The function name `addUnchecked` specifically refers to the fact that no checks are being performed, so this must not be called until policy checks have passed.

This function is called from within _validation.cpp_ (`MemPoolAccept::Finalize()`) where the appropriate consensus and policy checks _have_ already been performed on the transaction.
The transaction is added to the primary index `mapTx` before any fee prioritisation ("delta") is applied to it.

Next any links to parent transactions are generated by looping through the inputs and mapping the `COutPoint` of the input to this transaction `CTransaction` in the `mapNextTx` map.
Additionally the tx input is added to a set which is used to update parent transactions if they are still in the mempool.

After all inputs have been considered, `UpdateAncestorsOf()` is called which will add this transaction as a descendant to any ancestors in the mempool.
This is followed by `UpdateEntryForAncestors()` which will re-calculate and apply descendant `count`, `size`, `fee` and `sigOpCost` of the ancestors with the new descendant being accounted for.

Finally update `totalTxSize` and `totalFee` (both sum totals of the mempool) to account for this new transaction.

////
Every entry in the mempool contains a transaction, metadata such as the time it was received, fees rates, optional block height and/or time needed to satisfy timelocks, and optional pointers to any ancestors and descendants in the mempool.

Much of the mempool is devoted to keeping track of a transaction's in-mempool ancestors and descendants and their aggregated fees.
A transaction is only valid if its ancestors exist, otherwise it is considered an orphan.
If a transaction is evicted from the mempool, its descendants must be too.

As such, a transaction's effective feerate is not just its base feerate divided by weight, but that of itself and all of its ancestors.
This information is also taken into account when the mempool fills up and the node must choose which transactions to evict (also based on fees).
Of course, all of this information can be calculated on the fly, but constructing a block is extremely time-sensitive, so the mempool opts to cache this information rather than spend more time calculating it.
As one might imagine, the family DAGs can get quite hairy and a source of resource exhaustion, so one part of mempool policy is to limit individual transactions' connectivity.

////

== Removal from the mempool

Transactions are removed from the mempool for a number of reasons:

. A new block has been connected `removeForBlock()`
. A re-org is taking place `removeForReorg()`
. The transaction has xref:mempool-lifecycle.adoc#default_mempool_expire[expired] `Expire()`
. The transaction is being replaced by a higher-fee version `MemPoolAccept::Finalize()`
. The mempool must be trimmed back down below its maximum size `TrimToSize()`

.Removal from the mempool
[mermaid,target=mempool-removal,format=svg,align="center"]
....
flowchart LR
    remove_staged["RemoveStaged()"]
    remove_recursive["removeRecursive()"]
    remove_reorg["removeForReorg()"]
    remove_block["removeForBlock()"]
    expire["Expire()"]
    trim_to_size["TrimToSize()"]
    finalize["MemPoolAccept::Finalize()"]
    calculate_ancestors["CalculateMemPoolAncestors()"]
    update_ancestors["UpdateAncestorsOf()"]
    update_children["UpdateChildrenForRemoval()"]
    remove_unchecked["removeUnchecked()"]
    
    remove_recursive --> remove_staged
    remove_reorg --> remove_staged
    remove_block --> remove_staged
    expire --> remove_staged
    trim_to_size --> remove_staged
    finalize ---> remove_staged
    
    remove_staged --> update_for_remove

    update_for_remove --> remove_unchecked
    
    subgraph validation.cpp
        finalize
    end
    
    subgraph txmempool.cpp
        remove_recursive
        remove_reorg
        remove_block
        expire
        trim_to_size
    end
    
    subgraph update_for_remove["UpdateForRemoveFromMempool()"]
        calculate_ancestors --> update_ancestors --> update_children
    end
....

`RemoveStaged()` takes a set of transactions referenced by their txid along with their https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/txmempool.h#L347-L354[removal reason], and removes them sequentially.
It does this by first updating the ancestors of the transaction, followed by the descendants.
After calculating and updating related transaction information it calls `removeUnchecked()` which actions the removal from the mempool.

`removeUnchecked()` starts by notifying the validation interface that a transaction has been removed from the mempool for all reasons other than a new block arriving, as there is a different `BlockConnected` signal which can be used for that.

Next it loops over the ``txin``s of the transaction, and removes each `prevout` of each `txin` from the `mapNextTx` map.

[TIP]
====
`mapNextTx` is used to map a `COutPoint` to the unconfirmed transaction spending it.
This way there is a quick lookup available to check that a new transaction being added to the mempool is not trying to double spend a UTXO.

You can see the map being created as new transactions are learned about in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/txmempool.cpp#L510[`addUnchecked()`].
====

If the node has upgraded to SegWit the `vTxHashes` vector, which stores ``wtxid``s is then updated.
As `vTxHashes` stores the ``wtxid``s in random order, first we move the transaction's entry to the back, and then pop it off, resizing the vector if needed.

Finally, as with `addUnchecked()` we update the mempool sum totals for `txSize` and `fee` and erase the transaction from the primary mempool index `mapTx`.

TIP: Both adding and removing transactions increment the `mempool_seqence` counter.
This is used by the `getrawmempool` RPC (via `MempoolToJSON`) in tracking the number of mempool database transaction operations.
