asciidoc_workflow.adoc, before:

= Use of the asciidoc format

The https://asciidoctor.org/[asciidoc] format has been used for this documentation.

To use asciidoc format, ensure that the `asciidoctor` tool is installed (and on your system $PATH).
Also, it can be useful to ensure your editor understands the filetype, e.g. for Vim you can install https://github.com/habamax/vim-asciidoctor[vim-asciidoctor].

A quick reference for asciidoc formatting can be found https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/syntax-quick-reference/[here].

This documentation follows the asciidoc recommended practice of https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#one-sentence-per-line[One Sentence Per Line]. 
If you choose to contribute (thank you!) please try and continue this practice to make future editing more straightforward.

== Generating _index.html_ for static web hosting

You can generate an _index.html_ file for static web hosting by installing the <<asciidoctor>> tool and then running:

[source,bash]
----
asciidoctor index.adoc
----

Simply host _index.html_ along with the _images/_ directory and its contents at the root of your web server to serve the documentation.

=== Update _index.html_ automatically as a pre-commit hook

If you prefer you can write a simple pre-commit hook to update _index.html_ file automatically at each commit.
An example of this might be:

._$PROJECT_ROOT/.git/hooks/pre-commit_
[source,bash]
----
#!/usr/bin/bash

asciidoctor index.adoc
----

Commit message:

Update workflow to reflect generating mermaid diagrams

asciidoc_workflow.adoc, after:

= Use of the asciidoc format

The https://asciidoctor.org/[asciidoc] format has been used for this documentation.

To use asciidoc format, ensure that the `asciidoctor` tool is installed (and on your system $PATH).
Also, it can be useful to ensure your editor understands the filetype, e.g. for Vim you can install https://github.com/habamax/vim-asciidoctor[vim-asciidoctor].

A quick reference for asciidoc formatting can be found https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/syntax-quick-reference/[here].

This documentation follows the asciidoc recommended practice of https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#one-sentence-per-line[One Sentence Per Line]. 
If you choose to contribute (thank you!) please try and continue this practice to make future editing more straightforward.

== Generating _index.html_ for static web hosting

You can generate an _index.html_ file for static web hosting by installing the <<asciidoctor>> tool and then running:

[source,bash]
----
asciidoctor index.adoc
----

Simply host _index.html_ along with the _images/_ directory and its contents at the root of your web server to serve the documentation.

=== Regenerate mermaid diagrams

In order to regenerate the mermaid diagrams, you will need https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid-cli[mermaid-cli] and https://docs.asciidoctor.org/diagram-extension/latest/[asciidoctor-diagram] installed.

With both of the above programs on your PATH, you can then run command:

[source,shell]
----
asciidoctor -r asciidoctor-diagram index.adoc
----

To generate index.html, along with required images in the `/images` sub-directory.

=== Update _index.html_ automatically as a pre-commit hook

If you prefer you can write a simple pre-commit hook to update _index.html_ file automatically at each commit.
An example of this might be:

._$PROJECT_ROOT/.git/hooks/pre-commit_
[source,bash]
----
#!/usr/bin/bash

asciidoctor index.adoc
----
