calculating-balance.adoc, before:

:page-title: Calculating a balance
:page-nav_order: 30
:page-parent: Wallet
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
=== Calculating a balance

For balance calculation we https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/wallet/receive.cpp#L293-L320[iterate^] `mapWallet` and add values to a `Balance` struct.

[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
struct Balance {
    CAmount m_mine_trusted{0};           //!< Trusted, at depth=GetBalance.min_depth or more
    CAmount m_mine_untrusted_pending{0}; //!< Untrusted, but in mempool (pending)
    CAmount m_mine_immature{0};          //!< Immature coinbases in the main chain
    CAmount m_watchonly_trusted{0};
    CAmount m_watchonly_untrusted_pending{0};
    CAmount m_watchonly_immature{0};
};
----

////
(does this call `availableCoins`?)
////

We do some caching during iteration so that we avoid re-calculating the same values for multiple transactions.

.Wallet balance terminology
[sidebar]
****
[horizontal]
`debit`:: amount out
`credit`:: amount in
`availableCredit`:: amount available to send out (not dirty or immature)
****

Calculating the above requires using `TxSpends` and `IsMine`.

When a new transaction involving the wallet takes place, really what happens is that it's marked as `DIRTY`, which deletes the cached entry for the parent transaction.
This means that the next time `GetBalance()` is called, `debit` is recalculated correctly.
https://bitcoincore.reviews/18113[This^] Bitcoin Core PR review club goes into more detail on coins being marked as `DIRTY` and `FRESH` in the cache.

`TxSpends` is calculated by looking at the outpoints in the transaction itself.

.`COutput` vs `COutPoint`
[sidebar]
****
[horizontal]
`COutPoint`:: a pair of `txid : index`, useful when you want to know which UTXO an input spends.
`COutput`:: created for coin selection and contains the entire previous UTXO (script, amount), along with helpers for calculating fees and effective value.
****

``COutput``s are ephemeral -- we create them, perform another operation with them and discard them.
They are stored in `availableCoins` which is recreated when calling functions such as `GetAvailableBalance()`, `ListCoins()` and `CreateTransactionInternal()`.

In a spending transaction all inputs have their corresponding `OutPoints`, and we map these to spending transactions in `TxSpends`.

IMPORTANT: We assume anything (i.e. transactions) that reach the wallet have already been validated by the node and we therefore blindly assume that it is valid in wallet code.

If a transaction is our own we check for validity with `testMempoolAccept` before submitting to the P2P network.

=== IsMine

For DSPKM running `IsMine()` is really simple: descriptors generate a list of ScriptPubKeys, and, if the SPK we are interested in is in the list, then it's ours.

`IsMine` returns an https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/wallet/ismine.h#L20-L49[enum^].
This is used as a return value, a filter and set of flags simultaneously.
There is more background on the general `IsMine` semantics in the v0.21.0 https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.21.0.md#ismine-semantics[release notes^].

LSPKM can have watch-only and spendable flags set at the same time, but DSPKM is either or, because descriptor wallets do not allow mixtures of spendable and watch-only keys in the same SPKM.
Because Legacy wallets are all key-based, we will need to see if a script _could have been generated by one of our keys_; what type of script it is; and if we have a (private) key for it.

For Legacy watch-only wallets we simply check "do we have this script stored as a script?" (where `CScripts` in the database are our watch-only scripts)".
If we don't have a `CKey` for a script but it exists in `mapScripts` then it's implicitly watch-only.

A problem with this current method of `IsMine` for legacy wallets is that it's tough to figure out what your wallet considers "Mine" -- it's probably a finite set, but maybe not...

Another consideration is that the LSPKM `IsMine` includes P2PK outputs -- which don't have addresses!
This un-enumerability can be an issue in migration of Legacy to Descriptor wallets.

There is also the possibility that someone can mutate address to different address type and you will still see it as `IsMine`. E.g. mutate P2PK into P2PKH address and wallet will still detect.

With descriptors we only look for scripts explicitly.
With descriptor wallets `IsMine` might not recognise script hashes from scripts, because it was not told to watch for them and consider them as belonging to it.

We use the `IsMine` filters in many places, primarily to distinguish between spendable and watch-only:

`IsMine::All`:: spendable and watch-only (use for legacy wallet)
`IsMine::Used`:: not used by `IsMine`, but instead used as a filter for tracking when addresses have been reused.

[sidebar]
****
PR https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19602[19602^] enables migration of legacy wallets -> descriptor wallets from Bitcoin Core version 24.0.
Although legacy wallets are now effectively end of life it's still relevant to have documentation for legacy wallets.
****

See the section on how wallets determine whether transactions belong to them using the <<{transaction-identification}ismine-enum,IsMine>> enum for more in-depth information.

=== Conflict tracking

Conflict tracking is related to changing the state as the mempool tells us about conflicting transactions.

`mapTxSpends` is a multimap which permits having the same `COutPoint` mapping to _two_ transactions. (i.e. two transactions spending the same input)
This is how we can tell if things are conflicted: look up an outpoint and check to see how many transactions are there, if > 1 then we know that there was a conflict.

If there is a conflict we can look up the wallet transaction and see what state it's in, and we can be sure about whether it is currently or previously conflicted.

Conflict tracking is particularly relevant for coin selection...
////
TODO: Why?
////

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

calculating-balance.adoc, after:

:page-title: Calculating a balance
:page-nav_order: 30
:page-parent: Wallet
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
=== Calculating a balance

For balance calculation we https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/wallet/receive.cpp#L293-L320[iterate^] `mapWallet` and add values to a `Balance` struct.

[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
struct Balance {
    CAmount m_mine_trusted{0};           //!< Trusted, at depth=GetBalance.min_depth or more
    CAmount m_mine_untrusted_pending{0}; //!< Untrusted, but in mempool (pending)
    CAmount m_mine_immature{0};          //!< Immature coinbases in the main chain
    CAmount m_watchonly_trusted{0};
    CAmount m_watchonly_untrusted_pending{0};
    CAmount m_watchonly_immature{0};
};
----

////
(does this call `availableCoins`?)
////

We do some caching during iteration so that we avoid re-calculating the same values for multiple transactions.

.Wallet balance terminology
[sidebar]
****
[horizontal]
`debit`:: amount out
`credit`:: amount in
`availableCredit`:: amount available to send out (not dirty or immature)
****

Calculating the above requires using `TxSpends` and `IsMine`.

When a new transaction involving the wallet takes place, really what happens is that it's marked as `DIRTY`, which deletes the cached entry for the parent transaction.
This means that the next time `GetBalance()` is called, `debit` is recalculated correctly.
https://bitcoincore.reviews/18113[This^] Bitcoin Core PR review club goes into more detail on coins being marked as `DIRTY` and `FRESH` in the cache.

`TxSpends` is calculated by looking at the outpoints in the transaction itself.

.`COutput` vs `COutPoint`
[sidebar]
****
[horizontal]
`COutPoint`:: a pair of `txid : index`, useful when you want to know which UTXO an input spends.
`COutput`:: created for coin selection and contains the entire previous UTXO (script, amount), along with helpers for calculating fees and effective value.
****

``COutput``s are ephemeral -- we create them, perform another operation with them and discard them.
They are stored in `availableCoins` which is recreated when calling functions such as `GetAvailableBalance()`, `ListCoins()` and `CreateTransactionInternal()`.

In a spending transaction all inputs have their corresponding `OutPoints`, and we map these to spending transactions in `TxSpends`.

IMPORTANT: We assume anything (i.e. transactions) that reach the wallet have already been validated by the node and we therefore blindly assume that it is valid in wallet code.

If a transaction is our own we check for validity with `testMempoolAccept` before submitting to the P2P network.

=== IsMine

For DSPKM running `IsMine()` is really simple: descriptors generate a list of ScriptPubKeys, and, if the SPK we are interested in is in the list, then it's ours.

`IsMine` returns an https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/wallet/ismine.h#L20-L49[enum^].
This is used as a return value, a filter and set of flags simultaneously.
There is more background on the general `IsMine` semantics in the v0.21.0 https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.21.0.md#ismine-semantics[release notes^].

LSPKM can have watch-only and spendable flags set at the same time, but DSPKM is either or, because descriptor wallets do not allow mixtures of spendable and watch-only keys in the same SPKM.
Because Legacy wallets are all key-based, we will need to see if a script _could have been generated by one of our keys_; what type of script it is; and if we have a (private) key for it.

For Legacy watch-only wallets we simply check "do we have this script stored as a script?" (where `CScripts` in the database are our watch-only scripts)".
If we don't have a `CKey` for a script but it exists in `mapScripts` then it's implicitly watch-only.

A problem with this current method of `IsMine` for legacy wallets is that it's tough to figure out what your wallet considers "Mine" -- it's probably a finite set, but maybe not...

Another consideration is that the LSPKM `IsMine` includes P2PK outputs -- which don't have addresses!
This un-enumerability can be an issue in migration of Legacy to Descriptor wallets.

There is also the possibility that someone can mutate address to different address type and you will still see it as `IsMine`. E.g. mutate P2PK into P2PKH address and wallet will still detect.

With descriptors we only look for scripts explicitly.
With descriptor wallets `IsMine` might not recognise script hashes from scripts, because it was not told to watch for them and consider them as belonging to it.

We use the `IsMine` filters in many places, primarily to distinguish between spendable and watch-only:

`IsMine::All`:: spendable and watch-only (use for legacy wallet)
`IsMine::Used`:: not used by `IsMine`, but instead used as a filter for tracking when addresses have been reused.

[sidebar]
****
PR https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19602[19602^] enables migration of legacy wallets -> descriptor wallets from Bitcoin Core version 24.0.
Although legacy wallets are now effectively end of life it's still relevant to have documentation for legacy wallets.
****

See the section on how wallets determine whether transactions belong to them using the xref:transaction-identification.adoc#ismine-enum[enum] for more in-depth information.

=== Conflict tracking

Conflict tracking is related to changing the state as the mempool tells us about conflicting transactions.

`mapTxSpends` is a multimap which permits having the same `COutPoint` mapping to _two_ transactions. (i.e. two transactions spending the same input)
This is how we can tell if things are conflicted: look up an outpoint and check to see how many transactions are there, if > 1 then we know that there was a conflict.

If there is a conflict we can look up the wallet transaction and see what state it's in, and we can be sure about whether it is currently or previously conflicted.

Conflict tracking is particularly relevant for coin selection...
////
TODO: Why?
////
