coin-selection.adoc, before:

:page-title: Coin selection
:page-nav_order: 40
:page-parent: Wallet
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[id=coin-selection-overview]
=== Coin selection

See https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/coin-selection/[Bitcoin Optech^] for more information on coin selection.
There is a section digging deeper into the coin selection code found <<{constructing-transactions}coin-selection,below>>.
To select inputs to a transaction our primary considerations are privacy and fees.

The below sections form an overview of creating a transaction via `CreateTransactionInternal()`.

==== `AvailableCoins()`

The gist of how we generate a list of coins available to spend (via `AvailableCoins()`) is that we iterate `mapWallet` and check for coins that:

* Are not immature coinbase outputs
* Are not conflicted
* Must be at least in our mempool
* Not currently replacing or being replaced by another transaction
* Are not locked
* Are `IsMine`
* Are `spendable`

...and return them as a `std::vector<COutput>`.

[id=GroupOutputs]
==== `GroupOutputs()`

Once we have this vector of coins `GroupOutputs()` will turn them into ``OutputGroup``s.
An `OutputGroup` consists of outputs with the same script, i.e. "coins sent to the same address".

////
Effective Value is = Coins value - Fee
////

[id=selectCoins]
==== `selectCoins()`

If you manually choose inputs, it will add outputs to the transaction automatically.
It tries first to make sure that all outputs selected have 6 confirmations, if unsuccessful it then tries again with 1 confirmation as the lower bound.

For change outputs it starts with 1 confirmation and then again with 0.
If this is still unsuccessful it increases the number of ancestors and descendants that unconfirmed change can have.

==== `AttemptSelection()`

This function is orchestrating the <<GroupOutputs,Output group>> creation, and then the <<selectCoins,coin selection>>.
Currently, this is always based on the <<{constructing-transactions}coin-selection,waste metric>>.

It is using 3 algorithms and then selecting the "best" of the three (based on the waste metric):

. Branch n bound (bnb)
. Knapsack
. Single Random Draw (SRD)

There is currently an idea that a limited SRD could replace Knapsack in the future.
Due to this plan for removal, it would not make sense to focus development effort on improving the Knapsack algorithm at this time.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

coin-selection.adoc, after:

:page-title: Coin selection
:page-nav_order: 40
:page-parent: Wallet
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[id=coin-selection-overview]
=== Coin selection

See https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/coin-selection/[Bitcoin Optech^] for more information on coin selection.
There is a section digging deeper into the coin selection code found xref:constructing-transactions.adoc#coin-selection[below].
To select inputs to a transaction our primary considerations are privacy and fees.

The below sections form an overview of creating a transaction via `CreateTransactionInternal()`.

==== `AvailableCoins()`

The gist of how we generate a list of coins available to spend (via `AvailableCoins()`) is that we iterate `mapWallet` and check for coins that:

* Are not immature coinbase outputs
* Are not conflicted
* Must be at least in our mempool
* Not currently replacing or being replaced by another transaction
* Are not locked
* Are `IsMine`
* Are `spendable`

...and return them as a `std::vector<COutput>`.

[id=GroupOutputs]
==== `GroupOutputs()`

Once we have this vector of coins `GroupOutputs()` will turn them into ``OutputGroup``s.
An `OutputGroup` consists of outputs with the same script, i.e. "coins sent to the same address".

////
Effective Value is = Coins value - Fee
////

[id=selectCoins]
==== `selectCoins()`

If you manually choose inputs, it will add outputs to the transaction automatically.
It tries first to make sure that all outputs selected have 6 confirmations, if unsuccessful it then tries again with 1 confirmation as the lower bound.

For change outputs it starts with 1 confirmation and then again with 0.
If this is still unsuccessful it increases the number of ancestors and descendants that unconfirmed change can have.

==== `AttemptSelection()`

This function is orchestrating the <<GroupOutputs,Output group>> creation, and then the <<selectCoins,coin selection>>.
Currently, this is always based on the xref:constructing-transactions.adoc#coin-selection[waste metric].

It is using 3 algorithms and then selecting the "best" of the three (based on the waste metric):

. Branch n bound (bnb)
. Knapsack
. Single Random Draw (SRD)

There is currently an idea that a limited SRD could replace Knapsack in the future.
Due to this plan for removal, it would not make sense to focus development effort on improving the Knapsack algorithm at this time.
