consensus-exercises.adoc, before:

:page-title: Consensus exercises
:page-nav_order: 120
:page-parent: Consensus and Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Exercises

[qanda]
What is the difference between contextual and context-free validation checks?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Contextual checks require some knowledge of the current "state", e.g. ChainState, chain tip or UTXO set.

Context-free checks only require the information required in the transaction itself.

For more info, see <<{transaction-validation}glozow-tx-mempool-validation,glozow's notes>> on transaction "Validation and Submission to the Mempool".
====

What are some examples of each?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
context-free:

. `tx.isCoinbase()`
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/consensus/tx_check.cpp#L25-L28[0 &#8804; tx_value &#8804; MAX_MONEY^]
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/policy/policy.cpp#L88[tx not overweight^]

contextual:

. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/validation.cpp#L671-L692[check inputs are available^]
====

In which function(s) do UTXO-related validity checks happen?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`ConnectBlock()`
====

What type of validation checks are `CheckBlockHeader()` and `CheckBlock()` performing?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
context-free
====

Which class is in charge of managing the current blockchain?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`ChainstateManager()`
====

Which class is in charge of managing the UTXO set?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`CCoinsViews()`
====

Which functions are called when a longer chain is found that we need to re-org onto?::
TODO

Are there any areas of the codebase where the same consensus or validation checks are performed twice?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Again see https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[glozow's notes^] for examples
====

Why does `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache` exist?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
To prevent us from re-checking the scripts of transactions already in our mempool during consensus validation on learning about a new block
====

Which function(s) are in charge of validating the merkle root of a block?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`BlockMerkleRoot()` and `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()` construct a vector of merkle leaves, which is then passed to `ComputeMerkleRoot()` for calculation.
// TODO: Calculate the merkle root of a sample block
====

Can you find any evidence (e.g. PRs) which have been made in an effort to modularize consensus code?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
A few examples: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10279[PR#10279^], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158[PR#20158^]
====

What is the function of `BlockManager()`?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
It manages the current most-work chaintip and pruning of unneeded blocks (`\*.blk`) and associated undo (`*.rev`) files
====

What stops a malicious node from sending multiple invalid headers to try and use up a nodes' disk space? (hint: these might be stored in `BlockManager.m_failed_blocks`)::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Even invalid headers would need a valid proof of work which would be too costly to construct for a spammer
====

Which functions are responsible for writing consensus-valid blocks to disk?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/node/blockstorage.h#SaveBlockToDisk`
====

Are there any other components to Bitcoin Core which, similarly to the block storage database, are not themselves performing validation but can still be consensus-critical?::
Not sure myself, sounds like an interesting question though!

In which module (and class) is signature verification handled?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/script/interpreter.cpp#BaseSignatureChecker`
====

Which function is used to calculate the Merkle root of a block, and from where is it called?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/consensus/merkle.cpp#ComputeMerkleRoot` is used to compute the merkle root.

It is called from `src/chainparams.cpp#CreateGenesisBlock`, `src/miner.cpp#IncrementExtraNonce` & `src/miner.cpp#RegenerateCommitments` and from `src/validation.cpp#CheckBlock` to validate incoming blocks.
====

Practical question on Merkle root calculation::
TODO, add more Exercises

* Modify the https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/script/script.h#L444-L450[code^] which is used to add new opcodes to a `CScript` without breaking consensus.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

consensus-exercises.adoc, after:

:page-title: Consensus exercises
:page-nav_order: 120
:page-parent: Consensus and Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Exercises

[qanda]
What is the difference between contextual and context-free validation checks?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Contextual checks require some knowledge of the current "state", e.g. ChainState, chain tip or UTXO set.

Context-free checks only require the information required in the transaction itself.

For more info, see xref:transaction-validation.adoc#glozow-tx-mempool-validation[glozow's notes] on transaction "Validation and Submission to the Mempool".
====

What are some examples of each?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
context-free:

. `tx.isCoinbase()`
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/consensus/tx_check.cpp#L25-L28[0 &#8804; tx_value &#8804; MAX_MONEY^]
. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/policy/policy.cpp#L88[tx not overweight^]

contextual:

. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/4b5659c6b115315c9fd2902b4edd4b960a5e066e/src/validation.cpp#L671-L692[check inputs are available^]
====

In which function(s) do UTXO-related validity checks happen?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`ConnectBlock()`
====

What type of validation checks are `CheckBlockHeader()` and `CheckBlock()` performing?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
context-free
====

Which class is in charge of managing the current blockchain?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`ChainstateManager()`
====

Which class is in charge of managing the UTXO set?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`CCoinsViews()`
====

Which functions are called when a longer chain is found that we need to re-org onto?::
TODO

Are there any areas of the codebase where the same consensus or validation checks are performed twice?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Again see https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin-notes/tree/e9855dc377811b6d77bb75d8606c776cc26c1860/transaction-lifecycle.md#Validation-and-Submission-to-Mempool[glozow's notes^] for examples
====

Why does `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache` exist?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
To prevent us from re-checking the scripts of transactions already in our mempool during consensus validation on learning about a new block
====

Which function(s) are in charge of validating the merkle root of a block?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`BlockMerkleRoot()` and `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()` construct a vector of merkle leaves, which is then passed to `ComputeMerkleRoot()` for calculation.
// TODO: Calculate the merkle root of a sample block
====

Can you find any evidence (e.g. PRs) which have been made in an effort to modularize consensus code?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
A few examples: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10279[PR#10279^], https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158[PR#20158^]
====

What is the function of `BlockManager()`?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
It manages the current most-work chaintip and pruning of unneeded blocks (`\*.blk`) and associated undo (`*.rev`) files
====

What stops a malicious node from sending multiple invalid headers to try and use up a nodes' disk space? (hint: these might be stored in `BlockManager.m_failed_blocks`)::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
Even invalid headers would need a valid proof of work which would be too costly to construct for a spammer
====

Which functions are responsible for writing consensus-valid blocks to disk?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/node/blockstorage.h#SaveBlockToDisk`
====

Are there any other components to Bitcoin Core which, similarly to the block storage database, are not themselves performing validation but can still be consensus-critical?::
Not sure myself, sounds like an interesting question though!

In which module (and class) is signature verification handled?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/script/interpreter.cpp#BaseSignatureChecker`
====

Which function is used to calculate the Merkle root of a block, and from where is it called?::
+
.Click for answer
[%collapsible]
====
`src/consensus/merkle.cpp#ComputeMerkleRoot` is used to compute the merkle root.

It is called from `src/chainparams.cpp#CreateGenesisBlock`, `src/miner.cpp#IncrementExtraNonce` & `src/miner.cpp#RegenerateCommitments` and from `src/validation.cpp#CheckBlock` to validate incoming blocks.
====

Practical question on Merkle root calculation::
TODO, add more Exercises

* Modify the https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/script/script.h#L444-L450[code^] which is used to add new opcodes to a `CScript` without breaking consensus.
