gui-initialization.adoc, before:

:page-title: GUI initialization
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: GUI
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Main GUI program

The loading point for the GUI is _src/qt/main.cpp_.
`main()` calls `GuiMain()` from _src/qt/bitcoin.cpp_, passing along any program arguments with it.
`GuiMain` starts by calling `SetupEnvironment()` which amongst other things, configures the runtime locale and charset.

Next an empty `NodeContext` is set up, which is then populated into a fully-fledged node interface via being passed to `interfaces::MakeNode()`, which returns an `interfaces::Node`.
Recall that in <<{wallet-init}wallet_component_initialisation>> we also saw the wallet utilizing a `NodeContext` as part of its `WalletInitInterface`.
In both cases the `NodeContext` is being used to pass chain and network references around without needing to create globals.

After some QT setup, command-line and application arguments are parsed.
What follows can be outlined from the code comments:

[start=3]
. Application identification
. Initialization of translations, so that intro dialogue is in user's language
. Now that settings and translations are available, ask user for data directory
. Determine availability of data directory and parse bitcoin.conf
. Determine network (and switch to network specific options)
. URI IPC sending
. Main GUI initialization

== GUI initialisation

After configuration the GUI is initialized.
Here the `Node` object created earlier is passed to `app.SetNode()` before a window is created and the application executed.

The bulk of the Qt GUI classes are defined in _src/qt/bitcoingui.{h|cpp}_.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

gui-initialization.adoc, after:

:page-title: GUI initialization
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: GUI
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Main GUI program

The loading point for the GUI is _src/qt/main.cpp_.
`main()` calls `GuiMain()` from _src/qt/bitcoin.cpp_, passing along any program arguments with it.
`GuiMain` starts by calling `SetupEnvironment()` which amongst other things, configures the runtime locale and charset.

Next an empty `NodeContext` is set up, which is then populated into a fully-fledged node interface via being passed to `interfaces::MakeNode()`, which returns an `interfaces::Node`.
Recall that in xref:wallet-init.adoc#wallet_component_initialisation[wallet component initialization] we also saw the wallet utilizing a `NodeContext` as part of its `WalletInitInterface`.
In both cases the `NodeContext` is being used to pass chain and network references around without needing to create globals.

After some QT setup, command-line and application arguments are parsed.
What follows can be outlined from the code comments:

[start=3]
. Application identification
. Initialization of translations, so that intro dialogue is in user's language
. Now that settings and translations are available, ask user for data directory
. Determine availability of data directory and parse bitcoin.conf
. Determine network (and switch to network specific options)
. URI IPC sending
. Main GUI initialization

== GUI initialisation

After configuration the GUI is initialized.
Here the `Node` object created earlier is passed to `app.SetNode()` before a window is created and the application executed.

The bulk of the Qt GUI classes are defined in _src/qt/bitcoingui.{h|cpp}_.
