input-checks.adoc, before:

:page-title: Input validation
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: Transaction Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[prechecks]]
=== PreChecks

The code comments for `PreChecks` give a clear description of what the PreChecks are for:

.src/validation.cpp#MemPoolAccept::PreChecks()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
// Run the policy checks on a given transaction, excluding any script checks.
// Looks up inputs, calculates feerate, considers replacement, evaluates
// package limits, etc. As this function can be invoked for "free" by a peer,
// only tests that are fast should be done here (to avoid CPU DoS).
----

The `PreChecks` function is very https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/validation.cpp#L668-L906[long^] but is worth examining to understand better which checks are undertaken as part of this first stage.

=== ReplacementChecks

During `PreChecks` the `m_rbf` bool will have been set to `true` if it is determined that this transaction would have to replace an existing transaction from our mempool.
If this bool is set, then `ReplacementChecks` will be run.
These checks are designed to check that BIP125 RBF rules are being adhered to.

=== PolicyScriptChecks

Following `ReplacementChecks` we initialise a `PrecomputedTransactionData` struct in the `Workspace` which will hold expensive-to-compute data that we might want to use again in subsequent validation steps.

.Click to show the `PrecomputedTransactionData` struct
[%collapsible]
====
.script/interpreter.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
struct PrecomputedTransactionData
{
    // BIP341 precomputed data.
    // These are single-SHA256, see https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki#cite_note-15.
    uint256 m_prevouts_single_hash;
    uint256 m_sequences_single_hash;
    uint256 m_outputs_single_hash;
    uint256 m_spent_amounts_single_hash;
    uint256 m_spent_scripts_single_hash;
    //! Whether the 5 fields above are initialized.
    bool m_bip341_taproot_ready = false;

    // BIP143 precomputed data (double-SHA256).
    uint256 hashPrevouts, hashSequence, hashOutputs;
    //! Whether the 3 fields above are initialized.
    bool m_bip143_segwit_ready = false;

    std::vector<CTxOut> m_spent_outputs;
    //! Whether m_spent_outputs is initialized.
    bool m_spent_outputs_ready = false;

    PrecomputedTransactionData() = default;

    template <class T>
    void Init(const T& tx, std::vector<CTxOut>&& spent_outputs);

    template <class T>
    explicit PrecomputedTransactionData(const T& tx);
};
----
====

Next we call `PolicyScriptChecks()` passing in the same `ATMPArgs` and `Workspace` that we used with PreChecks.
This is going to check the transaction against our individual node's policies.

[TIP]
====
Note that local node policies are not necessarily consensus-binding, but are designed to help prevent resource exhaustion (e.g. DoS) on our node.

See the <<{transaction-validation}transaction_validation>> and <<{locating-consensus-code}consensus_in_bitcoin_core>> sections for more information on the differences between policy and consensus.
====

`PolicyScriptChecks()` starts with initialisation of the transaction into a `CTransaction`, before beginning to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/validation.cpp#L973-L999[check^] the input scripts against the script flags.

.src/validation.cpp#PolicyScriptChecks
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool MemPoolAccept::PolicyScriptChecks(const ATMPArgs& args, Workspace& ws, PrecomputedTransactionData& txdata)
{
    const CTransaction& tx = *ws.m_ptx;
    TxValidationState& state = ws.m_state;

    constexpr unsigned int scriptVerifyFlags = STANDARD_SCRIPT_VERIFY_FLAGS;

    // Check input scripts and signatures.
    // This is done last to help prevent CPU exhaustion denial-of-service attacks.
    if (!CheckInputScripts(tx, state, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags, true, false, txdata)) { <1>
        // SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK requires SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS, so we
        // need to turn both off, and compare against just turning off CLEANSTACK
        // to see if the failure is specifically due to witness validation.
        TxValidationState state_dummy; // Want reported failures to be from first CheckInputScripts
        if (!tx.HasWitness() && CheckInputScripts(tx, state_dummy, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags & ~(SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS | SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK), true, false, txdata) &&
                !CheckInputScripts(tx, state_dummy, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags & ~SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK, true, false, txdata)) {
            // Only the witness is missing, so the transaction itself may be fine.
            state.Invalid(TxValidationResult::TX_WITNESS_STRIPPED,
                    state.GetRejectReason(), state.GetDebugMessage());
        }
        return false; // state filled in by CheckInputScripts
    }

    return true;
}
----

<1> Calling `CheckInputScripts()` involves ECDSA signature verification and is therefore computationally expensive.

// TODO: Why?
If the script type is SegWit an additional round of checking is performed, this time including the `CLEANSTACK` rule.
The call(s) flag `cacheSigStore` as `true`, and `cacheFullScriptStore` as `false`, which means that matched signatures will be persisted in the cache, but matched full scripts will be removed.

=== ConsensusScriptChecks

If the `PolicyScriptChecks` return `true` we will move on to consensus script checks, again passing in the same `ATMPArgs`, `Workspace` and now `PrecomputedTransactionData` that we used previously with `PolicyScriptChecks`.

The main check in here is `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache()` which is going to compare all the transaction inputs to our mempool, checking that they have not already been marked as spent.
If the coin is not already spent, we reference it from either the UTXO set or our mempool, and finally submit it through `CheckInputScripts()` once more, this time caching both the signatures and the full scripts.

.Click to show `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache()`
[%collapsible]
====
.src/validation.cpp#CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
/**
* Checks to avoid mempool polluting consensus critical paths since cached
* signature and script validity results will be reused if we validate this
* transaction again during block validation.
* */
static bool CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache(const CTransaction& tx, TxValidationState& state,
                const CCoinsViewCache& view, const CTxMemPool& pool,
                unsigned int flags, PrecomputedTransactionData& txdata, CCoinsViewCache& coins_tip)
                EXCLUSIVE_LOCKS_REQUIRED(cs_main, pool.cs)
{
    AssertLockHeld(cs_main);
    AssertLockHeld(pool.cs);

    assert(!tx.IsCoinBase());
    for (const CTxIn& txin : tx.vin) {
        const Coin& coin = view.AccessCoin(txin.prevout);

        // This coin was checked in PreChecks and MemPoolAccept
        // has been holding cs_main since then.
        Assume(!coin.IsSpent());
        if (coin.IsSpent()) return false;

        // If the Coin is available, there are 2 possibilities:
        // it is available in our current ChainstateActive UTXO set,
        // or it's a UTXO provided by a transaction in our mempool.
        // Ensure the scriptPubKeys in Coins from CoinsView are correct.
        const CTransactionRef& txFrom = pool.get(txin.prevout.hash);
        if (txFrom) {
            assert(txFrom->GetHash() == txin.prevout.hash);
            assert(txFrom->vout.size() > txin.prevout.n);
            assert(txFrom->vout[txin.prevout.n] == coin.out);
        } else {
            assert(std::addressof(::ChainstateActive().CoinsTip()) == std::addressof(coins_tip));
            const Coin& coinFromUTXOSet = coins_tip.AccessCoin(txin.prevout);
            assert(!coinFromUTXOSet.IsSpent());
            assert(coinFromUTXOSet.out == coin.out);
        }
    }

    // Call CheckInputScripts() to cache signature and script validity against current tip consensus rules.
    return CheckInputScripts(tx, state, view, flags, /* cacheSigStore = */ true, /* cacheFullSciptStore = */ true, txdata);
}
----
====

=== PackageMempoolChecks

`PackageMempoolChecks` are designed to "Enforce package mempool ancestor/descendant limits (distinct from individual ancestor/descendant limits done in PreChecks)".
They take a vector of ``CTransactionRef``s and a `PackageValidationState`.

Again we take <<{single-transactions}multiple_locks,two locks>> before checking that the transactions are not in the mempool.
Any transactions which are part of the package and were in the mempool will have already been removed by `MemPoolAccept::AcceptPackage()`.

Finally we check the package limits, which consists of checking the {ancestor|descendant} {count|size}.
This check is unique to packages because we can now add descendants whose ancestors would not otherwise qualify for entry into our mempool with their low effective fee rate.

=== Finalize

Provided that consensus script checks pass and this was not a test ATMP call, we will call `Finalize()` on the transaction.
This will remove any conflicting (lower fee) transactions from the mempool before adding this one, finishing by trimming the mempool to the configured size (default: `static const unsigned int DEFAULT_MAX_MEMPOOL_SIZE = 300;` MB).
In the event that *this* transaction got trimmed, we ensure that we return a `TxValidationResult::TX_MEMPOOL_POLICY, "mempool full"` result.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

input-checks.adoc, after:

:page-title: Input validation
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: Transaction Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[prechecks]]
=== PreChecks

The code comments for `PreChecks` give a clear description of what the PreChecks are for:

.src/validation.cpp#MemPoolAccept::PreChecks()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
// Run the policy checks on a given transaction, excluding any script checks.
// Looks up inputs, calculates feerate, considers replacement, evaluates
// package limits, etc. As this function can be invoked for "free" by a peer,
// only tests that are fast should be done here (to avoid CPU DoS).
----

The `PreChecks` function is very https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/validation.cpp#L668-L906[long^] but is worth examining to understand better which checks are undertaken as part of this first stage.

=== ReplacementChecks

During `PreChecks` the `m_rbf` bool will have been set to `true` if it is determined that this transaction would have to replace an existing transaction from our mempool.
If this bool is set, then `ReplacementChecks` will be run.
These checks are designed to check that BIP125 RBF rules are being adhered to.

=== PolicyScriptChecks

Following `ReplacementChecks` we initialise a `PrecomputedTransactionData` struct in the `Workspace` which will hold expensive-to-compute data that we might want to use again in subsequent validation steps.

.Click to show the `PrecomputedTransactionData` struct
[%collapsible]
====
.script/interpreter.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
struct PrecomputedTransactionData
{
    // BIP341 precomputed data.
    // These are single-SHA256, see https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki#cite_note-15.
    uint256 m_prevouts_single_hash;
    uint256 m_sequences_single_hash;
    uint256 m_outputs_single_hash;
    uint256 m_spent_amounts_single_hash;
    uint256 m_spent_scripts_single_hash;
    //! Whether the 5 fields above are initialized.
    bool m_bip341_taproot_ready = false;

    // BIP143 precomputed data (double-SHA256).
    uint256 hashPrevouts, hashSequence, hashOutputs;
    //! Whether the 3 fields above are initialized.
    bool m_bip143_segwit_ready = false;

    std::vector<CTxOut> m_spent_outputs;
    //! Whether m_spent_outputs is initialized.
    bool m_spent_outputs_ready = false;

    PrecomputedTransactionData() = default;

    template <class T>
    void Init(const T& tx, std::vector<CTxOut>&& spent_outputs);

    template <class T>
    explicit PrecomputedTransactionData(const T& tx);
};
----
====

Next we call `PolicyScriptChecks()` passing in the same `ATMPArgs` and `Workspace` that we used with PreChecks.
This is going to check the transaction against our individual node's policies.

[TIP]
====
Note that local node policies are not necessarily consensus-binding, but are designed to help prevent resource exhaustion (e.g. DoS) on our node.

See the xref:transaction-validation.adoc#transaction_validation[transaction validation] and xref:locating-consensus-code.adoc#consensus_in_bitcoin_core[consensus in bitcoin core] sections for more information on the differences between policy and consensus.
====

`PolicyScriptChecks()` starts with initialisation of the transaction into a `CTransaction`, before beginning to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/v23.0/src/validation.cpp#L973-L999[check^] the input scripts against the script flags.

.src/validation.cpp#PolicyScriptChecks
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool MemPoolAccept::PolicyScriptChecks(const ATMPArgs& args, Workspace& ws, PrecomputedTransactionData& txdata)
{
    const CTransaction& tx = *ws.m_ptx;
    TxValidationState& state = ws.m_state;

    constexpr unsigned int scriptVerifyFlags = STANDARD_SCRIPT_VERIFY_FLAGS;

    // Check input scripts and signatures.
    // This is done last to help prevent CPU exhaustion denial-of-service attacks.
    if (!CheckInputScripts(tx, state, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags, true, false, txdata)) { <1>
        // SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK requires SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS, so we
        // need to turn both off, and compare against just turning off CLEANSTACK
        // to see if the failure is specifically due to witness validation.
        TxValidationState state_dummy; // Want reported failures to be from first CheckInputScripts
        if (!tx.HasWitness() && CheckInputScripts(tx, state_dummy, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags & ~(SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS | SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK), true, false, txdata) &&
                !CheckInputScripts(tx, state_dummy, m_view, scriptVerifyFlags & ~SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK, true, false, txdata)) {
            // Only the witness is missing, so the transaction itself may be fine.
            state.Invalid(TxValidationResult::TX_WITNESS_STRIPPED,
                    state.GetRejectReason(), state.GetDebugMessage());
        }
        return false; // state filled in by CheckInputScripts
    }

    return true;
}
----

<1> Calling `CheckInputScripts()` involves ECDSA signature verification and is therefore computationally expensive.

// TODO: Why?
If the script type is SegWit an additional round of checking is performed, this time including the `CLEANSTACK` rule.
The call(s) flag `cacheSigStore` as `true`, and `cacheFullScriptStore` as `false`, which means that matched signatures will be persisted in the cache, but matched full scripts will be removed.

=== ConsensusScriptChecks

If the `PolicyScriptChecks` return `true` we will move on to consensus script checks, again passing in the same `ATMPArgs`, `Workspace` and now `PrecomputedTransactionData` that we used previously with `PolicyScriptChecks`.

The main check in here is `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache()` which is going to compare all the transaction inputs to our mempool, checking that they have not already been marked as spent.
If the coin is not already spent, we reference it from either the UTXO set or our mempool, and finally submit it through `CheckInputScripts()` once more, this time caching both the signatures and the full scripts.

.Click to show `CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache()`
[%collapsible]
====
.src/validation.cpp#CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
/**
* Checks to avoid mempool polluting consensus critical paths since cached
* signature and script validity results will be reused if we validate this
* transaction again during block validation.
* */
static bool CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache(const CTransaction& tx, TxValidationState& state,
                const CCoinsViewCache& view, const CTxMemPool& pool,
                unsigned int flags, PrecomputedTransactionData& txdata, CCoinsViewCache& coins_tip)
                EXCLUSIVE_LOCKS_REQUIRED(cs_main, pool.cs)
{
    AssertLockHeld(cs_main);
    AssertLockHeld(pool.cs);

    assert(!tx.IsCoinBase());
    for (const CTxIn& txin : tx.vin) {
        const Coin& coin = view.AccessCoin(txin.prevout);

        // This coin was checked in PreChecks and MemPoolAccept
        // has been holding cs_main since then.
        Assume(!coin.IsSpent());
        if (coin.IsSpent()) return false;

        // If the Coin is available, there are 2 possibilities:
        // it is available in our current ChainstateActive UTXO set,
        // or it's a UTXO provided by a transaction in our mempool.
        // Ensure the scriptPubKeys in Coins from CoinsView are correct.
        const CTransactionRef& txFrom = pool.get(txin.prevout.hash);
        if (txFrom) {
            assert(txFrom->GetHash() == txin.prevout.hash);
            assert(txFrom->vout.size() > txin.prevout.n);
            assert(txFrom->vout[txin.prevout.n] == coin.out);
        } else {
            assert(std::addressof(::ChainstateActive().CoinsTip()) == std::addressof(coins_tip));
            const Coin& coinFromUTXOSet = coins_tip.AccessCoin(txin.prevout);
            assert(!coinFromUTXOSet.IsSpent());
            assert(coinFromUTXOSet.out == coin.out);
        }
    }

    // Call CheckInputScripts() to cache signature and script validity against current tip consensus rules.
    return CheckInputScripts(tx, state, view, flags, /* cacheSigStore = */ true, /* cacheFullSciptStore = */ true, txdata);
}
----
====

=== PackageMempoolChecks

`PackageMempoolChecks` are designed to "Enforce package mempool ancestor/descendant limits (distinct from individual ancestor/descendant limits done in PreChecks)".
They take a vector of ``CTransactionRef``s and a `PackageValidationState`.

Again we take xref:single-transactions.adoc#multiple_locks[two locks] before checking that the transactions are not in the mempool.
Any transactions which are part of the package and were in the mempool will have already been removed by `MemPoolAccept::AcceptPackage()`.

Finally we check the package limits, which consists of checking the {ancestor|descendant} {count|size}.
This check is unique to packages because we can now add descendants whose ancestors would not otherwise qualify for entry into our mempool with their low effective fee rate.

=== Finalize

Provided that consensus script checks pass and this was not a test ATMP call, we will call `Finalize()` on the transaction.
This will remove any conflicting (lower fee) transactions from the mempool before adding this one, finishing by trimming the mempool to the configured size (default: `static const unsigned int DEFAULT_MAX_MEMPOOL_SIZE = 300;` MB).
In the event that *this* transaction got trimmed, we ensure that we return a `TxValidationResult::TX_MEMPOOL_POLICY, "mempool full"` result.
