locating-consensus-code.adoc, before:

:page-title: Locating consensus code
:page-nav_order: 0
:page-parent: Consensus and Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[consensus_in_bitcoin_core]]
== Consensus in Bitcoin Core

Naturally one might assume that all code related to consensus could be found in the _src/consensus/_ directory, however this is not entirely the case.
Components of consensus-related code can be found across the Bitcoin Core codebase in a number of files, including but not limited to:

[#consensus-components,listing]
----
📂 bitcoin
  📂 src
    📂 consensus
    📂 script
      📄interpreter.cpp
    📄 validation.h
    📄 validation.cpp
----

Consensus-critical functions can also be found in proximity to code which could affect whether a node considers a transaction or block valid.
This could extend to, for example, block storage <<{consensus-bugs}database_consensus,database>> code.

An abbreviated list of some of the more notable consensus functions and variables is shown below.

.Some consensus functions and variables
[cols="2,4"]
|===
|File |Objects

|_src/consensus/amount.h_
|`COIN`, `MAX_MONEY`, `MoneyRange()`

|_src/consensus/consensus.h_
|`BLOCK{SIZE\|WEIGHT\|SIGOPS_COST}`, `COINBASE_MATURITY`, `WITNESS_SCALE_FACTOR`, `MIN_TX_WEIGHT`

|_src/consensus/merkle.{h\|cpp}_
|`ComputeMerkleRoot(),` `BlockMerkleRoot(),` `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()`

|_src/consensus/params.h_
|`BuriedDeployment`, `Params`(buried blocks which are valid but known to fail default script verify checks, BIP height activations, PoW params)

|_src/consensus/tx_check.{h\|cpp}_
|`CheckTransaction()`

|_src/consensus/tx_verify.{h\|cpp}_
|`CheckTxInputs(),` `Get{Legacy}SigOpCount()`, `IsFinalTx(),` `SequenceLock(s)()`

|_src/consensus/validation.h_
|`TxValidationResult` (validation result reason), `BlockValidationResult` (validation result reason), `ValidationState`, `Get{Transaction\|Block\|TransactionInput}Weight()`

|===

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

locating-consensus-code.adoc, after:

:page-title: Locating consensus code
:page-nav_order: 0
:page-parent: Consensus and Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[consensus_in_bitcoin_core]]
== Consensus in Bitcoin Core

Naturally one might assume that all code related to consensus could be found in the _src/consensus/_ directory, however this is not entirely the case.
Components of consensus-related code can be found across the Bitcoin Core codebase in a number of files, including but not limited to:

[#consensus-components,listing]
----
📂 bitcoin
  📂 src
    📂 consensus
    📂 script
      📄interpreter.cpp
    📄 validation.h
    📄 validation.cpp
----

Consensus-critical functions can also be found in proximity to code which could affect whether a node considers a transaction or block valid.
This could extend to, for example, block storage xref:consensus-bugs.adoc#database_consensus[database] code.

An abbreviated list of some of the more notable consensus functions and variables is shown below.

.Some consensus functions and variables
[cols="2,4"]
|===
|File |Objects

|_src/consensus/amount.h_
|`COIN`, `MAX_MONEY`, `MoneyRange()`

|_src/consensus/consensus.h_
|`BLOCK{SIZE\|WEIGHT\|SIGOPS_COST}`, `COINBASE_MATURITY`, `WITNESS_SCALE_FACTOR`, `MIN_TX_WEIGHT`

|_src/consensus/merkle.{h\|cpp}_
|`ComputeMerkleRoot(),` `BlockMerkleRoot(),` `BlockWitnessMerkleRoot()`

|_src/consensus/params.h_
|`BuriedDeployment`, `Params`(buried blocks which are valid but known to fail default script verify checks, BIP height activations, PoW params)

|_src/consensus/tx_check.{h\|cpp}_
|`CheckTransaction()`

|_src/consensus/tx_verify.{h\|cpp}_
|`CheckTxInputs(),` `Get{Legacy}SigOpCount()`, `IsFinalTx(),` `SequenceLock(s)()`

|_src/consensus/validation.h_
|`TxValidationResult` (validation result reason), `BlockValidationResult` (validation result reason), `ValidationState`, `Get{Transaction\|Block\|TransactionInput}Weight()`

|===
