mempool-lifecycle.adoc, before:

:page-title: Mempool lifecycle
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: Mempool
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Mempool life cycle

=== Initialisation

The primary mempool object itself is initialized onto the `node` in _init.cpp_ as part of `AppInitMain()` which takes `NodeContext& node` as an argument.

.init.cpp#AppInitMain()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
assert(!node.mempool);
int check_ratio = std::min<int>(std::max<int>(args.GetIntArg("-checkmempool", chainparams.DefaultConsistencyChecks() ? 1 : 0), 0), 1000000);
node.mempool = std::make_unique<CTxMemPool>(node.fee_estimator.get(), check_ratio);
----

[NOTE]
====
The `check_ratio`, used to determine sanity checks, defaults to `0` for all networks except regtest, unless the `checkmempool` program option has been specified.

Sanity checking here refers to checking the consistency of the entire mempool every 1 in `n` times a new transaction is added, so is potentially computationally expensive to have enabled. +
See `CTxMemPool::Check()` for more information on what the check does.
====

==== Loading a previous mempool

If the node has been run before then it might have some blocks and a mempool to load.
"Step 11: import blocks" of `AppInitMain()` in _init.cpp_ calls `ThreadImport()` to load the mempool from disk where it is saved to file `mempool.dat`:

.init.cpp#AppInitMain()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    chainman.m_load_block = std::thread(&TraceThread<std::function<void()>>, "loadblk", [=, &chainman, &args] {
        ThreadImport(chainman, vImportFiles, args);
    });
----

TIP: This is run in its own thread so that (potentially) slow disk I/O has a minimal impact on startup times, and the remainder of startup execution can be continued.

`ThreadImport` runs a few jobs sequentially:

. Optionally perform a reindex
. Load the block files from disk
. Check that we are still on the best chain according to the blocks loaded from disk
. Load the mempool via `chainman.ActiveChainstate().LoadMempool(args);`

`validation.cpp#LoadMempool()` is an almost mirror of `DumpMempool()` described in more detail below in <<Mempool shutdown>>:

. Read the version and count of serialized transactions to follow
. Test each tx for expiry before submitting it to MemPoolAccept
. Read any remaining `mapDeltas` and `unbroadcast_txids` from the file and apply them


[id=default_mempool_expire]
[TIP]
====
We test for expiry because it is current default policy not to keep transactions in the mempool longer than 336 hours, i.e. two weeks. +
The default value comes from the constant `DEFAULT_MEMPOOL_EXPIRE` which can be overridden by the user with the `-mempoolexpiry` option. +
Loading (and validating) a mempool of transactions this old is likely a waste of time and resources.
====

=== Runtime execution

While the node is running the mempool is persisted in memory.
By default the mempool is limited to 300MB as specified by `DEFAULT_MAX_MEMPOOL_SIZE`.
This can be overridden by the program option `maxmempoolsize`.

See <<{mempool-tx-format}mempool_tx_format>> for more information on what data counts towards this limit, or review the `CTxMemPool` data members which store current usage metrics e.g. `CTxMemPool::cachedInnerUsage` and the implementation of e.g. `CTxMemPool::DynamicMemoryUsage()`.

=== Mempool shutdown

When the node is shut down its mempool is (by default) persisted to disk, called from `init.cpp#Shutdown()`:

.init.cpp#Shutdown()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    if (node.mempool && node.mempool->IsLoaded() && node.args->GetArg("-persistmempool", DEFAULT_PERSIST_MEMPOOL)) {
        DumpMempool(*node.mempool);
    }
----

A pointer to the mempool object is passed to `DumpMempool()`, which begins by locking the mempool mutex, `pool.cs`, before a snapshot of the mempool is created using local variables `mapDeltas`, `vinfo` and `unbroadcast_txids`.

TIP: `mapDeltas` is used by miners to apply (fee) prioritisation to certain transactions when creating new block templates.

TIP: `vinfo` stores information on each transaction as a vector of `CTxMemPoolInfo` objects.

.validation.cpp#DumpMempool()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool DumpMempool(const CTxMemPool& pool, FopenFn mockable_fopen_function, bool skip_file_commit)
{
    int64_t start = GetTimeMicros();

    std::map<uint256, CAmount> mapDeltas;
    std::vector<TxMempoolInfo> vinfo;
    std::set<uint256> unbroadcast_txids;

    static Mutex dump_mutex;
    LOCK(dump_mutex);

    {
        LOCK(pool.cs);
        for (const auto &i : pool.mapDeltas) {
            mapDeltas[i.first] = i.second;
        }
        vinfo = pool.infoAll();
        unbroadcast_txids = pool.GetUnbroadcastTxs();
    }
----

Next a new (temporary) file is opened and some metadata related to mempool version and size is written to the front.
Afterwards we loop through `vinfo` writing the transaction, the time it entered the mempool and the fee delta (prioritisation) to the file, before deleting its entry from our `mapDeltas` mirror.

Finally, any remaining info in `mapDeltas` is appended to the file.
This might include prioritisation information on transactions not in our mempool.

.validation.cpp#DumpMempool()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    // ...
    try {
        FILE* filestr{mockable_fopen_function(GetDataDir() / "mempool.dat.new", "wb")};
        if (!filestr) {
            return false;
        }

        CAutoFile file(filestr, SER_DISK, CLIENT_VERSION);

        uint64_t version = MEMPOOL_DUMP_VERSION;
        file << version;

        file << (uint64_t)vinfo.size();
        for (const auto& i : vinfo) {
            file << *(i.tx);
            file << int64_t{count_seconds(i.m_time)};
            file << int64_t{i.nFeeDelta};
            mapDeltas.erase(i.tx->GetHash());
        }

        file << mapDeltas;

        LogPrintf("Writing %d unbroadcast transactions to disk.\n", unbroadcast_txids.size());
        file << unbroadcast_txids;
    // ...
}
----

****
We are able to write (and later read) `mapDeltas` and `unbroadcast_txids` to the file only using the `<<` operator.
This is due to the operator overload on the `CAutoFile` class found in _streams.h_:

.streams.h
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
/**
 * map
 */
template<typename Stream, typename K, typename T, typename Pred, typename A>
void Serialize(Stream& os, const std::map<K, T, Pred, A>& m)
{
    WriteCompactSize(os, m.size());
    for (const auto& entry : m)
        Serialize(os, entry);
}

class: CAutoFile
{
public:
    // ...
    template<typename T>
    CAutoFile& operator<<(const T& obj)
    {
        // Serialize to this stream
        if (!file)
            throw std::ios_base::failure("CAutoFile::operator<<: file handle is nullptr");
        ::Serialize(*this, obj);
        return (*this);
    }
    // ...
};
----

****

Finally, if writing the elements to the temporary file was successful, we close the file and rename it to `mempool.dat`.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

mempool-lifecycle.adoc, after:

:page-title: Mempool lifecycle
:page-nav_order: 20
:page-parent: Mempool
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Mempool life cycle

=== Initialisation

The primary mempool object itself is initialized onto the `node` in _init.cpp_ as part of `AppInitMain()` which takes `NodeContext& node` as an argument.

.init.cpp#AppInitMain()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
assert(!node.mempool);
int check_ratio = std::min<int>(std::max<int>(args.GetIntArg("-checkmempool", chainparams.DefaultConsistencyChecks() ? 1 : 0), 0), 1000000);
node.mempool = std::make_unique<CTxMemPool>(node.fee_estimator.get(), check_ratio);
----

[NOTE]
====
The `check_ratio`, used to determine sanity checks, defaults to `0` for all networks except regtest, unless the `checkmempool` program option has been specified.

Sanity checking here refers to checking the consistency of the entire mempool every 1 in `n` times a new transaction is added, so is potentially computationally expensive to have enabled. +
See `CTxMemPool::Check()` for more information on what the check does.
====

==== Loading a previous mempool

If the node has been run before then it might have some blocks and a mempool to load.
"Step 11: import blocks" of `AppInitMain()` in _init.cpp_ calls `ThreadImport()` to load the mempool from disk where it is saved to file `mempool.dat`:

.init.cpp#AppInitMain()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    chainman.m_load_block = std::thread(&TraceThread<std::function<void()>>, "loadblk", [=, &chainman, &args] {
        ThreadImport(chainman, vImportFiles, args);
    });
----

TIP: This is run in its own thread so that (potentially) slow disk I/O has a minimal impact on startup times, and the remainder of startup execution can be continued.

`ThreadImport` runs a few jobs sequentially:

. Optionally perform a reindex
. Load the block files from disk
. Check that we are still on the best chain according to the blocks loaded from disk
. Load the mempool via `chainman.ActiveChainstate().LoadMempool(args);`

`validation.cpp#LoadMempool()` is an almost mirror of `DumpMempool()` described in more detail below in <<Mempool shutdown>>:

. Read the version and count of serialized transactions to follow
. Test each tx for expiry before submitting it to MemPoolAccept
. Read any remaining `mapDeltas` and `unbroadcast_txids` from the file and apply them


[id=default_mempool_expire]
[TIP]
====
We test for expiry because it is current default policy not to keep transactions in the mempool longer than 336 hours, i.e. two weeks. +
The default value comes from the constant `DEFAULT_MEMPOOL_EXPIRE` which can be overridden by the user with the `-mempoolexpiry` option. +
Loading (and validating) a mempool of transactions this old is likely a waste of time and resources.
====

=== Runtime execution

While the node is running the mempool is persisted in memory.
By default the mempool is limited to 300MB as specified by `DEFAULT_MAX_MEMPOOL_SIZE`.
This can be overridden by the program option `maxmempoolsize`.

See xref:mempool-tx-format.adoc#mempool_tx_format[mempool tx format] for more information on what data counts towards this limit, or review the `CTxMemPool` data members which store current usage metrics e.g. `CTxMemPool::cachedInnerUsage` and the implementation of e.g. `CTxMemPool::DynamicMemoryUsage()`.

=== Mempool shutdown

When the node is shut down its mempool is (by default) persisted to disk, called from `init.cpp#Shutdown()`:

.init.cpp#Shutdown()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    if (node.mempool && node.mempool->IsLoaded() && node.args->GetArg("-persistmempool", DEFAULT_PERSIST_MEMPOOL)) {
        DumpMempool(*node.mempool);
    }
----

A pointer to the mempool object is passed to `DumpMempool()`, which begins by locking the mempool mutex, `pool.cs`, before a snapshot of the mempool is created using local variables `mapDeltas`, `vinfo` and `unbroadcast_txids`.

TIP: `mapDeltas` is used by miners to apply (fee) prioritisation to certain transactions when creating new block templates.

TIP: `vinfo` stores information on each transaction as a vector of `CTxMemPoolInfo` objects.

.validation.cpp#DumpMempool()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool DumpMempool(const CTxMemPool& pool, FopenFn mockable_fopen_function, bool skip_file_commit)
{
    int64_t start = GetTimeMicros();

    std::map<uint256, CAmount> mapDeltas;
    std::vector<TxMempoolInfo> vinfo;
    std::set<uint256> unbroadcast_txids;

    static Mutex dump_mutex;
    LOCK(dump_mutex);

    {
        LOCK(pool.cs);
        for (const auto &i : pool.mapDeltas) {
            mapDeltas[i.first] = i.second;
        }
        vinfo = pool.infoAll();
        unbroadcast_txids = pool.GetUnbroadcastTxs();
    }
----

Next a new (temporary) file is opened and some metadata related to mempool version and size is written to the front.
Afterwards we loop through `vinfo` writing the transaction, the time it entered the mempool and the fee delta (prioritisation) to the file, before deleting its entry from our `mapDeltas` mirror.

Finally, any remaining info in `mapDeltas` is appended to the file.
This might include prioritisation information on transactions not in our mempool.

.validation.cpp#DumpMempool()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    // ...
    try {
        FILE* filestr{mockable_fopen_function(GetDataDir() / "mempool.dat.new", "wb")};
        if (!filestr) {
            return false;
        }

        CAutoFile file(filestr, SER_DISK, CLIENT_VERSION);

        uint64_t version = MEMPOOL_DUMP_VERSION;
        file << version;

        file << (uint64_t)vinfo.size();
        for (const auto& i : vinfo) {
            file << *(i.tx);
            file << int64_t{count_seconds(i.m_time)};
            file << int64_t{i.nFeeDelta};
            mapDeltas.erase(i.tx->GetHash());
        }

        file << mapDeltas;

        LogPrintf("Writing %d unbroadcast transactions to disk.\n", unbroadcast_txids.size());
        file << unbroadcast_txids;
    // ...
}
----

****
We are able to write (and later read) `mapDeltas` and `unbroadcast_txids` to the file only using the `<<` operator.
This is due to the operator overload on the `CAutoFile` class found in _streams.h_:

.streams.h
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
/**
 * map
 */
template<typename Stream, typename K, typename T, typename Pred, typename A>
void Serialize(Stream& os, const std::map<K, T, Pred, A>& m)
{
    WriteCompactSize(os, m.size());
    for (const auto& entry : m)
        Serialize(os, entry);
}

class: CAutoFile
{
public:
    // ...
    template<typename T>
    CAutoFile& operator<<(const T& obj)
    {
        // Serialize to this stream
        if (!file)
            throw std::ios_base::failure("CAutoFile::operator<<: file handle is nullptr");
        ::Serialize(*this, obj);
        return (*this);
    }
    // ...
};
----

****

Finally, if writing the elements to the temporary file was successful, we close the file and rename it to `mempool.dat`.
