multiple-transactions.adoc, before:

:page-title: Multiple transactions
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: Transaction Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]

[#multiple_transactions]
=== Multiple transactions (and packages)

TODO: This section should start from `AcceptPackage()` and flow through from there, including `AcceptMultipleTransactions()` as a sub-section.

It's possible to consider multiple transactions for validation together, via `AcceptMultipleTransactions()` found in _src/net_processing.cpp_.
It's currently only available from tests (`test/tx_package_tests.cpp`) and the `testmempoolaccept` RPC (via `ProcessNewPackage()`), but the intention is for it to be available to packages received from the P2P network in the future.

This validation flow has been created for usage with Package Mempool Accept, which glozow has written up in a https://gist.github.com/glozow/dc4e9d5c5b14ade7cdfac40f43adb18a[gist^] (https://archive.ph/Uhewe[archive^]).

The flow here is similar to <{single-transactions}<accept_single_transaction, `AcceptSingleTransaction()`>> in that we start by grabbing `cs_main` before initializing validation state and workspaces, however this time we use `PackageValidationState` and a vector of workspaces, `std::vector<Workspace>`.
Each transaction therefore has it's own workspace but all transactions in the package share a single validation state.
This aligns with the goal of either accepting or rejecting the entire package as a single entity.

Next come two `for` loops over the vector of workspaces (i.e. transactions).
The first performs the <<{input-checks}prechecks,`PreChecks()`>>, but this time also freeing up coins to be spent by other transactions in this package.
This would not usually be possible (nor make sense) _within_ an `AcceptTransaction()` flow, but within a package we want to be able to validate transactions who use as inputs, other transactions not yet added to our mempool:

[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    // Make the coins created by this transaction available for subsequent transactions in the
    // package to spend. Since we already checked conflicts in the package and we don't allow
    // replacements, we don't need to track the coins spent. Note that this logic will need to be
    // updated if package replace-by-fee is allowed in the future.
    assert(!args.m_allow_bip125_replacement);
    m_viewmempool.PackageAddTransaction(ws.m_ptx);
----

If the `PreChecks` do not fail, we call `m_viewmempool.PackageAddTransaction()` passing in the workspace.
This adds the transaction to a map in our Mempool called `std::unordered_map<COutPoint, Coin, SaltedOutpointHasher> m_temp_added;`, which is essentially a temporary cache somewhere in-between being validated and being fully added to the mempool.

TODO: Fix after adding section on `AcceptPackage`

After this first loop we perform `PackageMempoolChecks()` which first asserts that transactions are not already in the mempool, before checking the "PackageLimits".

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

multiple-transactions.adoc, after:

:page-title: Multiple transactions
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: Transaction Validation
include::links-onepage.adoc[]

[#multiple_transactions]
=== Multiple transactions (and packages)

TODO: This section should start from `AcceptPackage()` and flow through from there, including `AcceptMultipleTransactions()` as a sub-section.

It's possible to consider multiple transactions for validation together, via `AcceptMultipleTransactions()` found in _src/net_processing.cpp_.
It's currently only available from tests (`test/tx_package_tests.cpp`) and the `testmempoolaccept` RPC (via `ProcessNewPackage()`), but the intention is for it to be available to packages received from the P2P network in the future.

This validation flow has been created for usage with Package Mempool Accept, which glozow has written up in a https://gist.github.com/glozow/dc4e9d5c5b14ade7cdfac40f43adb18a[gist^] (https://archive.ph/Uhewe[archive^]).

The flow here is similar to xref:single-transactions.adoc#accept_single_transaction[`AcceptSingleTransaction()`] in that we start by grabbing `cs_main` before initializing validation state and workspaces, however this time we use `PackageValidationState` and a vector of workspaces, `std::vector<Workspace>`.
Each transaction therefore has it's own workspace but all transactions in the package share a single validation state.
This aligns with the goal of either accepting or rejecting the entire package as a single entity.

Next come two `for` loops over the vector of workspaces (i.e. transactions).
The first performs the xref:input-checks.adoc#prechecks[`PreChecks()`], but this time also freeing up coins to be spent by other transactions in this package.
This would not usually be possible (nor make sense) _within_ an `AcceptTransaction()` flow, but within a package we want to be able to validate transactions who use as inputs, other transactions not yet added to our mempool:

[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    // Make the coins created by this transaction available for subsequent transactions in the
    // package to spend. Since we already checked conflicts in the package and we don't allow
    // replacements, we don't need to track the coins spent. Note that this logic will need to be
    // updated if package replace-by-fee is allowed in the future.
    assert(!args.m_allow_bip125_replacement);
    m_viewmempool.PackageAddTransaction(ws.m_ptx);
----

If the `PreChecks` do not fail, we call `m_viewmempool.PackageAddTransaction()` passing in the workspace.
This adds the transaction to a map in our Mempool called `std::unordered_map<COutPoint, Coin, SaltedOutpointHasher> m_temp_added;`, which is essentially a temporary cache somewhere in-between being validated and being fully added to the mempool.

TODO: Fix after adding section on `AcceptPackage`

After this first loop we perform `PackageMempoolChecks()` which first asserts that transactions are not already in the mempool, before checking the "PackageLimits".
