p2p-attacks.adoc, before:

:page-title: P2P attacks
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: P2P
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== P2P attacks

In a permissionless system two types of users are both _equally_ free to access and attempt to use the network:

. Honest users
. Attackers/spammers

Types of activities an attacker might attempt to perform on a target node which involve the P2P layer include:

* Exhaust CPU/memory
** Create infinite loops
** Cause OOM (exhaust memory)
** Clog up network traffic
** Fill mempool with garbage
** Temporarily stall the network
* Eclipse/sybil attacks
** Reduce privacy
** Cause network splits
** https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/[Eclipse^] attack
** https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack[Sybil^] attack

The Bitcoin protocol does not have a concept of node identifiers or other reputation system through which we can permanently block a node we identify as malicious from future communications.
If a node reconnects to us using a different IP address we will not be able to tell it was the same node we had seen before.
Make no mistake that this is a large win for the censorship-resistance of the network, but it makes P2P implementation more precarious.

Our program must contain logic to protect against the above attacks in a scenario where they may happen often and freely.
Bitcoin Core employs a number of techniques in the P2P domain to try and protect against these types of attacks including:

.Protective counter-measures
[%autowidth.stretch]
|===
|Technique |Protection

|Proof of Work*
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Mempool policy for transactions
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Peer address bucketing
|Eclipse/Sybil attacks

|`block-relay-only` connections
|Eclipse attacks

|Ephemeral block-relay-only connections for headers
|Eclipse attacks

|<<{p2p-violations}p2p_violations,Disconnecting>> "misbehaving" peers
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Peer rotation/eviction
|Eclipse/sybil attacks

|Protected peers (from eviction)
|Eclipse attacks

|Anchor peers
|Eclipse attacks

|===

TIP: * If an "attacker" has sufficient hash power, then from a PoW perspective they are not really an attacker.

////
See glozow's https://vimeo.com/704956163[presentation^] on Censorship and DoS Attacks: An intro to Mempool Policy at Advancing Bitcoin 2022 for a synopsis of mempool policy.
////

[[eclipse_attacks]]
=== Eclipse attacks

https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/[Eclipse attacks^] occur when an adversary is able to isolate a victim's node from the rest of the network.

A _restart-based eclipse attack_ occurs when the adversary is able to add its own addresses to the victim's address manager and then force the victim to restart.
If the attack succeeds, the victim will make all of its connections to the adversary's addresses when it restarts.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17326[Issue 17326^] proposed persisting the node's outbound connection list to disk, and on restart reconnecting to the same peers.
It's worth reading the full discussion in that issue, since there are a lot of subtle points around which peers should be persisted.

https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/Addrman-and-eclipse-attacks[Addrman and eclipse attacks(bitcoin-devwiki)^] attempts to describe the mechanisms implemented in Bitcoin Core to mitigate eclipse attacks followed by open questions and areas of further research.

=== Identification of the network topology

If a malicious entity was able to identify the topography of the network then they could see that by taking specific nodes down, maybe via a DOS service or any attack that they can use, they can cause a partition in the entire network.

There are <<{message-relay}message_relay, three main messages that are gossiped around the network>> and **each message offers a unique set of information that allows an adversary to identify who your neighbors are**. 

<<{block-relay}block_relay,Block relay>> leaks the least information and we can leverage that for a feature called `block-relay-only` connections, a type of connection where nodes do not participate in transaction or address relay and only relay blocks.
An effective way for a spy node to infer the network topology is to observe the timing and details of transaction and address relay, so **these block-relay-only connections obfuscate network topology and help to mitigate eclipse attacks**.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15759[PR#15759^] introduced `block-relay-only` connections.
After these changes, nodes by default open two outbound block-relay-only connections on startup.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428[PR#17428^] introduced the idea of anchors, persist peers to reconnect after restart.
If you persist the connection to some peers is great for reliability but it would not be very good for privacy if we were to reconnect to the full relay connections.
So instead, we use the `block-relay-only` connections and reconnect to those.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19858[PR#19858^] proposes a more advanced use of block-relay-only connections to further mitigate eclipse attacks.
The node will periodically initiate an _additional_ block-relay-only connection which it uses only to sync headers in order to try and learn about new blocks.
If this reveals new blocks, the eviction logic will rotate out an existing block-relay-only connection.
If no new blocks are discovered, the connection is closed.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

p2p-attacks.adoc, after:

:page-title: P2P attacks
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: P2P
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== P2P attacks

In a permissionless system two types of users are both _equally_ free to access and attempt to use the network:

. Honest users
. Attackers/spammers

Types of activities an attacker might attempt to perform on a target node which involve the P2P layer include:

* Exhaust CPU/memory
** Create infinite loops
** Cause OOM (exhaust memory)
** Clog up network traffic
** Fill mempool with garbage
** Temporarily stall the network
* Eclipse/sybil attacks
** Reduce privacy
** Cause network splits
** https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/[Eclipse^] attack
** https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack[Sybil^] attack

The Bitcoin protocol does not have a concept of node identifiers or other reputation system through which we can permanently block a node we identify as malicious from future communications.
If a node reconnects to us using a different IP address we will not be able to tell it was the same node we had seen before.
Make no mistake that this is a large win for the censorship-resistance of the network, but it makes P2P implementation more precarious.

Our program must contain logic to protect against the above attacks in a scenario where they may happen often and freely.
Bitcoin Core employs a number of techniques in the P2P domain to try and protect against these types of attacks including:

.Protective counter-measures
[%autowidth.stretch]
|===
|Technique |Protection

|Proof of Work*
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Mempool policy for transactions
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Peer address bucketing
|Eclipse/Sybil attacks

|`block-relay-only` connections
|Eclipse attacks

|Ephemeral block-relay-only connections for headers
|Eclipse attacks

|xref:p2p-violations.adoc#p2p_violations[Disconnecting] "misbehaving" peers
|Exhaust CPU/memory

|Peer rotation/eviction
|Eclipse/sybil attacks

|Protected peers (from eviction)
|Eclipse attacks

|Anchor peers
|Eclipse attacks

|===

TIP: * If an "attacker" has sufficient hash power, then from a PoW perspective they are not really an attacker.

////
See glozow's https://vimeo.com/704956163[presentation^] on Censorship and DoS Attacks: An intro to Mempool Policy at Advancing Bitcoin 2022 for a synopsis of mempool policy.
////

[[eclipse_attacks]]
=== Eclipse attacks

https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/[Eclipse attacks^] occur when an adversary is able to isolate a victim's node from the rest of the network.

A _restart-based eclipse attack_ occurs when the adversary is able to add its own addresses to the victim's address manager and then force the victim to restart.
If the attack succeeds, the victim will make all of its connections to the adversary's addresses when it restarts.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17326[Issue 17326^] proposed persisting the node's outbound connection list to disk, and on restart reconnecting to the same peers.
It's worth reading the full discussion in that issue, since there are a lot of subtle points around which peers should be persisted.

https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/Addrman-and-eclipse-attacks[Addrman and eclipse attacks(bitcoin-devwiki)^] attempts to describe the mechanisms implemented in Bitcoin Core to mitigate eclipse attacks followed by open questions and areas of further research.

=== Identification of the network topology

If a malicious entity was able to identify the topography of the network then they could see that by taking specific nodes down, maybe via a DOS service or any attack that they can use, they can cause a partition in the entire network.

There are xref:message-relay.adoc#message_relay[three main messages that are gossiped around the network] and **each message offers a unique set of information that allows an adversary to identify who your neighbors are**.

xref:block-relay.adoc#block_relay[Block relay] leaks the least information and we can leverage that for a feature called `block-relay-only` connections, a type of connection where nodes do not participate in transaction or address relay and only relay blocks.
An effective way for a spy node to infer the network topology is to observe the timing and details of transaction and address relay, so **these block-relay-only connections obfuscate network topology and help to mitigate eclipse attacks**.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15759[PR#15759^] introduced `block-relay-only` connections.
After these changes, nodes by default open two outbound block-relay-only connections on startup.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428[PR#17428^] introduced the idea of anchors, persist peers to reconnect after restart.
If you persist the connection to some peers is great for reliability but it would not be very good for privacy if we were to reconnect to the full relay connections.
So instead, we use the `block-relay-only` connections and reconnect to those.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19858[PR#19858^] proposes a more advanced use of block-relay-only connections to further mitigate eclipse attacks.
The node will periodically initiate an _additional_ block-relay-only connection which it uses only to sync headers in order to try and learn about new blocks.
If this reveals new blocks, the eviction logic will rotate out an existing block-relay-only connection.
If no new blocks are discovered, the connection is closed.
