p2p-exercises.adoc, before:

:page-title: P2P exercises
:page-nav_order: 160
:page-parent: P2P
include:links-onepage.adoc
== Exercises

include::exercise-intro.adoc[]

. Make manual connections
- [ ] Add the following configuration options to a new Bitcoin Core node running on signet to have it start it with no connections:
+
[source,text]
----
signet=1
dnsseed=0
fixedseeds=0
debug=addrman
----
- [ ] Find the (only!) Signet DNS seeder node (in the `SigNetParams` class starting with "seed") and using a terminal poll this seed node for an address to connect to.
+
[TIP]
====
You can use `dig` or `nslookup` to retrieve seeds from the DNS seeder from the DNS seeders.
====
+
[CAUTION]
====
If you try this with the mainnet seeds you will need to consider which <<{bootstrapping}service_flags, service flags>> the seeder advertises support for.
For example, if a seed node advertises `x1` support this means they return ip addresses of nodes advertizing the `NODE_NETWORK` service flag.

You could query these from sipa's mainnet seeder by prepending `x1` to the subdomain e.g. `nslookup x1.seeder.bitcoin.sipa.be`
====
- [ ] Check how many addresses are known to your node: `bitcoin-cli -signet getnodeaddresses 0 | jq length`
- [ ] Using one of the addresses returned from the previous exercise, connect to this node using the `addnode` RPC.
- [ ] Observe new addresses being received and connected to in the bitcoind terminal or _$DATADIR/debug.log_ file.
- [ ] What dangers can there be in retrieving node addresses in this way?
- [ ] Is this more of less safe than using the hardcoded seeds? Can you think of a better way to distribute seeds to new users?

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

p2p-exercises.adoc, after:

:page-title: P2P exercises
:page-nav_order: 160
:page-parent: P2P
include:links-onepage.adoc
== Exercises

include::exercise-intro.adoc[]

. Make manual connections
- [ ] Add the following configuration options to a new Bitcoin Core node running on signet to have it start it with no connections:
+
[source,text]
----
signet=1
dnsseed=0
fixedseeds=0
debug=addrman
----
- [ ] Find the (only!) Signet DNS seeder node (in the `SigNetParams` class starting with "seed") and using a terminal poll this seed node for an address to connect to.
+
[TIP]
====
You can use `dig` or `nslookup` to retrieve seeds from the DNS seeder from the DNS seeders.
====
+
[CAUTION]
====
If you try this with the mainnet seeds you will need to consider which xref:bootstrapping.adoc#service_flags[service flags] the seeder advertises support for.
For example, if a seed node advertises `x1` support this means they return IP addresses of nodes advertizing the `NODE_NETWORK` service flag.

You could query these from sipa's mainnet seeder by prepending `x1` to the subdomain e.g. `nslookup x1.seeder.bitcoin.sipa.be`
====
- [ ] Check how many addresses are known to your node: `bitcoin-cli -signet getnodeaddresses 0 | jq length`
- [ ] Using one of the addresses returned from the previous exercise, connect to this node using the `addnode` RPC.
- [ ] Observe new addresses being received and connected to in the bitcoind terminal or _$DATADIR/debug.log_ file.
- [ ] What dangers can there be in retrieving node addresses in this way?
- [ ] Is this more of less safe than using the hardcoded seeds? Can you think of a better way to distribute seeds to new users?
