stats.adoc, before:

:page-title: Project statistics
:page-nav_order: 190
:page-parent: Overview and Development Process
== Project stats

.Bitcoin Core @ v24.0.1
[source,text]
----
===============================================================================
 Language            Files        Lines         Code     Comments       Blanks
===============================================================================
 GNU Style Assembly      1          913          742           96           75
 Autoconf               23         3530         1096         1727          707
 Automake                5         1803         1505           85          213
 BASH                   10         1772         1100          438          234
 Batch                   1            1            1            0            0
 C                      22        37994        35681         1183         1130
 C Header              481        72043        43968        17682        10393
 CMake                   3          901          706           86          109
 C++                   687       197249       153482        20132        23635
 Dockerfile              2           43           32            5            6
 HEX                    29          576          576            0            0
 Java                    1           23           18            0            5
 JSON                   94         7968         7630            0          338
 Makefile               51         2355         1823          198          334
 MSBuild                 2           88           87            0            1
 Objective-C++           3          186          134           20           32
 Prolog                  2           22           16            0            6
 Python                298        66473        48859         7598        10016
 Scheme                  1          638          577           29           32
 Shell                  50         2612         1745          535          332
 SVG                    20          720          697           15            8
 Plain Text              6         1125            0         1113           12
 TypeScript             98       228893       228831            0           62
 Visual Studio Pro|     16          956          940            0           16
 Visual Studio Sol|      1          162          162            0            0
 XML                     2           53           47            0            6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 HTML                    2          401          382            0           19
 |- CSS                  2           98           82            1           15
 (Total)                            499          464            1           34
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Markdown              192        33460            0        26721         6739
 |- BASH                16          206          173           12           21
 |- C                    2           53           47            3            3
 |- C++                  3          345          267           54           24
 |- INI                  1            7            6            0            1
 |- Lisp                 1           13           13            0            0
 |- PowerShell           1            1            1            0            0
 |- Python               2          346          280           61            5
 |- Shell                3           21           17            1            3
 |- XML                  1            4            4            0            0
 (Total)                          34456          808        26852         6796
===============================================================================
 Total                2103       662960       530837        77663        54460
===============================================================================
----

Source: https://github.com/XAMPPRocky/tokei[tokei^]

Commit message:

[Tokei] Add more specification about typescript shown by Tokei
In the Project stats, Tokei considers all .ts files as typescript files. In the case of Bitcoin Core, .ts are related to translation files.

stats.adoc, after:

:page-title: Project statistics
:page-nav_order: 190
:page-parent: Overview and Development Process
== Project stats

.Bitcoin Core @ v24.0.1
[source,text]
----
===============================================================================
 Language            Files        Lines         Code     Comments       Blanks
===============================================================================
 GNU Style Assembly      1          913          742           96           75
 Autoconf               23         3530         1096         1727          707
 Automake                5         1803         1505           85          213
 BASH                   10         1772         1100          438          234
 Batch                   1            1            1            0            0
 C                      22        37994        35681         1183         1130
 C Header              481        72043        43968        17682        10393
 CMake                   3          901          706           86          109
 C++                   687       197249       153482        20132        23635
 Dockerfile              2           43           32            5            6
 HEX                    29          576          576            0            0
 Java                    1           23           18            0            5
 JSON                   94         7968         7630            0          338
 Makefile               51         2355         1823          198          334
 MSBuild                 2           88           87            0            1
 Objective-C++           3          186          134           20           32
 Prolog                  2           22           16            0            6
 Python                298        66473        48859         7598        10016
 Scheme                  1          638          577           29           32
 Shell                  50         2612         1745          535          332
 SVG                    20          720          697           15            8
 Plain Text              6         1125            0         1113           12
 Typescript*            98       228893       228831            0           62
 Visual Studio Pro|     16          956          940            0           16
 Visual Studio Sol|      1          162          162            0            0
 XML                     2           53           47            0            6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 HTML                    2          401          382            0           19
 |- CSS                  2           98           82            1           15
 (Total)                            499          464            1           34
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Markdown              192        33460            0        26721         6739
 |- BASH                16          206          173           12           21
 |- C                    2           53           47            3            3
 |- C++                  3          345          267           54           24
 |- INI                  1            7            6            0            1
 |- Lisp                 1           13           13            0            0
 |- PowerShell           1            1            1            0            0
 |- Python               2          346          280           61            5
 |- Shell                3           21           17            1            3
 |- XML                  1            4            4            0            0
 (Total)                          34456          808        26852         6796
===============================================================================
 Total                2103       662960       530837        77663        54460
===============================================================================
----


Source: https://github.com/XAMPPRocky/tokei[tokei^]

Actually, Tokei considers all `.ts` files as Typescript files. In the Bitcoin Core repository,`.ts` files are translation source files used to translate the internal Bitcoin Wallet into various languages located in the `./src/qt/locale`.
