subtrees.adoc, before:

:page-title: Subtrees and PIMPL
:page-nav_order: 90
:page-parent: Architecture
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[subtrees]]
== Subtrees

Several parts of the repository (LevelDB, crc32c, secp256k1 etc.) are subtrees of software maintained elsewhere.

Some of these are maintained by active developers of Bitcoin Core, in which case changes should go directly upstream without being PRed directly against the project.
They will be merged back in the next subtree merge.

Others are external projects without a tight relationship with our project.

There is a tool in `test/lint/git-subtree-check.sh` to check a subtree directory for consistency with its upstream repository.

See the full https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md#subtrees[subtrees^] documentation for more information.

== Implementation separation

Many of the classes found throughout the codebase use the PIMPL technique to separate their implementation from the external representation.
See <<{appendix}pimpl-technique,PIMPL technique>> in the Appendix for more information.

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

subtrees.adoc, after:

:page-title: Subtrees and PIMPL
:page-nav_order: 90
:page-parent: Architecture
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
[[subtrees]]
== Subtrees

Several parts of the repository (LevelDB, crc32c, secp256k1 etc.) are subtrees of software maintained elsewhere.

Some of these are maintained by active developers of Bitcoin Core, in which case changes should go directly upstream without being PRed directly against the project.
They will be merged back in the next subtree merge.

Others are external projects without a tight relationship with our project.

There is a tool in `test/lint/git-subtree-check.sh` to check a subtree directory for consistency with its upstream repository.

See the full https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md#subtrees[subtrees^] documentation for more information.

== Implementation separation

Many of the classes found throughout the codebase use the PIMPL technique to separate their implementation from the external representation.
See xref:appendix.adoc#pimpl-technique[PIMPL technique] in the Appendix for more information.
