transaction-signing.adoc, before:

:page-title: Transaction signing
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: Script
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Signing a transaction

`script/sign.cpp#SignTransaction()` will sign a transaction one input at a time, by looping through the ``vin``s of the `CMutableTransaction` it has been passed.

The critical section of the `SignTransaction()` loop is shown below:

.src/script/sign.cpp#SignTransaction()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    for (unsigned int i = 0; i < mtx.vin.size(); i++) {
        CTxIn& txin = mtx.vin[i];
        auto coin = coins.find(txin.prevout);
        if (coin == coins.end() || coin->second.IsSpent()) {
            input_errors[i] = "Input not found or already spent";
            continue;
        }
        const CScript& prevPubKey = coin->second.out.scriptPubKey;
        const CAmount& amount = coin->second.out.nValue;

        SignatureData sigdata = DataFromTransaction(mtx, i, coin->second.out);
        // Only sign SIGHASH_SINGLE if there's a corresponding output:
        if (!fHashSingle || (i < mtx.vout.size())) {
            ProduceSignature(*keystore, MutableTransactionSignatureCreator(&mtx, i, amount, nHashType), prevPubKey, sigdata);
        }

        UpdateInput(txin, sigdata);
----

The Pubkey and amount for each coin are retrieved, along with signature data for the coin.
`DataFromTransaction()` returns all the information needed to produce a signature for that coin as a `SignatureData` struct:

.src/script/sign.h#SignatureData
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
// This struct contains information from a transaction input and also contains signatures for that input.
// The information contained here can be used to create a signature and is also filled by ProduceSignature
// in order to construct final scriptSigs and scriptWitnesses.
struct SignatureData {
    bool complete = false; ///< Stores whether the scriptSig and scriptWitness are complete
    bool witness = false; ///< Stores whether the input this SigData corresponds to is a witness input
    CScript scriptSig; ///< The scriptSig of an input. Contains complete signatures or the traditional partial signatures format
    CScript redeem_script; ///< The redeemScript (if any) for the input
    CScript witness_script; ///< The witnessScript (if any) for the input. witnessScripts are used in P2WSH outputs.
    CScriptWitness scriptWitness; ///< The scriptWitness of an input. Contains complete signatures or the traditional partial signatures format. scriptWitness is part of a transaction input per BIP 144.
    std::map<CKeyID, SigPair> signatures; ///< BIP 174 style partial signatures for the input. May contain all signatures necessary for producing a final scriptSig or scriptWitness.
    std::map<CKeyID, std::pair<CPubKey, KeyOriginInfo>> misc_pubkeys;
    std::vector<CKeyID> missing_pubkeys; ///< KeyIDs of pubkeys which could not be found
    std::vector<CKeyID> missing_sigs; ///< KeyIDs of pubkeys for signatures which could not be found
    uint160 missing_redeem_script; ///< ScriptID of the missing redeemScript (if any)
    uint256 missing_witness_script; ///< SHA256 of the missing witnessScript (if any)

    SignatureData() {}
    explicit SignatureData(const CScript& script) : scriptSig(script) {}
    void MergeSignatureData(SignatureData sigdata);
};
----

With the signing `SigningProvider`, `scriptPubKey` and `sigdata` we are able to call `script/sign.cpp#ProduceSignature()` for signing on each individual input.
// TODO: Fact check!
Inputs by default will signed with a sighash of `SIGHASH_ALL`, but this can be re-configured as appropriate.

=== Producing a signature

Taking a look inside `ProduceSignature()` we can see how this works.

.src/script/sign.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool ProduceSignature(const SigningProvider& provider, const BaseSignatureCreator& creator, const CScript& fromPubKey, SignatureData& sigdata)
{
    if (sigdata.complete) return true;

    std::vector<valtype> result;
    TxoutType whichType;
    bool solved = SignStep(provider, creator, fromPubKey, result, whichType, SigVersion::BASE, sigdata);
    bool P2SH = false;
    CScript subscript;
    sigdata.scriptWitness.stack.clear();

    // ...
}
----

The function performs some initialisations before calling `script/sign.cpp#SignStep()` for the first time, with the `SigVersion` `SIGVERSION::BASE`.
`SignStep()` in turn calls `Solver()`, which is a function designed to detect the script type encoding of the `scriptPubKey`, and then return the detected type along with the parsed ``scriptPubKey``s/hashes.

If it is successful, `SignStep` continues by switching over the script type and, depending on the script type, calling the required signing operation and pushing the required elements onto the `sigdata` variable.

.script/sign.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
static bool SignStep(const SigningProvider& provider, const BaseSignatureCreator& creator, const CScript& scriptPubKey,
                     std::vector<valtype>& ret, TxoutType& whichTypeRet, SigVersion sigversion, SignatureData& sigdata)
{
    // ...
    whichTypeRet = Solver(scriptPubKey, vSolutions);

    switch (whichTypeRet) {
    case TxoutType::NONSTANDARD:
    case TxoutType::NULL_DATA:
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_UNKNOWN:
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V1_TAPROOT:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::PUBKEY:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::PUBKEYHASH:
        // ... 
    case TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::MULTISIG:
        // ... 
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH:
        // ... 
    } 
    // ...
}
----

Once `SignStep()` returns to `ProduceSignature()`, a second switch takes place.
If we are trying to produce a signature for P2SH, P2WPKH or P2WSH then the first pass from `SignStep()` will have been enough to detect the `TxOutType` and assemble the (redeem/witness) scripts, but not yet generate the entire signature in required format.
In order to get this signature, `SignStep()` is called again, this time with the assembled redeem/witness script and the appropriate `TxOutType`.

TIP: This recursion makes sense if you consider that, in order to sign for these script-encumbered inputs, we don't want to sign for the `scriptPubKey` that we are starting with but for the {redeem|witness} script instead.

We can see this switch in `ProduceSignature()`:

.src/script/sign.cpp#ProduceSignature()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH)
    {
        // Solver returns the subscript that needs to be evaluated;
        // the final scriptSig is the signatures from that
        // and then the serialized subscript:
        subscript = CScript(result[0].begin(), result[0].end());
        sigdata.redeem_script = subscript;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, subscript, result, whichType, SigVersion::BASE, sigdata) && whichType != TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH;
        P2SH = true;
    }

    if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH)
    {
        CScript witnessscript;
        // This puts the parsed pubkeys from the first pass into the witness script
        witnessscript << OP_DUP << OP_HASH160 << ToByteVector(result[0]) << OP_EQUALVERIFY << OP_CHECKSIG;
        TxoutType subType;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, witnessscript, result, subType, SigVersion::WITNESS_V0, sigdata);
        sigdata.scriptWitness.stack = result;
        sigdata.witness = true;
        result.clear();
    }
    else if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH)
    {
        CScript witnessscript(result[0].begin(), result[0].end());
        sigdata.witness_script = witnessscript;
        TxoutType subType;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, witnessscript, result, subType, SigVersion::WITNESS_V0, sigdata) && subType != TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH && subType != TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH && subType != TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH;
        result.push_back(std::vector<unsigned char>(witnessscript.begin(), witnessscript.end()));
        sigdata.scriptWitness.stack = result;
        sigdata.witness = true;
        result.clear();
    } else if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_UNKNOWN) {
        sigdata.witness = true;
    }
----

Finally, if all went well the signature is checked with <<{validating-scripts}verifyscript,`VerifyScript()`>>.

=== Creating a signature

TODO: dig into `CreateSig()`

Commit message:

adoc: fix links after doc split
We must now use the xref style references, to link between independent
*.adoc files:
https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/inter-document-xref/

transaction-signing.adoc, after:

:page-title: Transaction signing
:page-nav_order: 10
:page-parent: Script
include::links-onepage.adoc[]
== Signing a transaction

`script/sign.cpp#SignTransaction()` will sign a transaction one input at a time, by looping through the ``vin``s of the `CMutableTransaction` it has been passed.

The critical section of the `SignTransaction()` loop is shown below:

.src/script/sign.cpp#SignTransaction()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    for (unsigned int i = 0; i < mtx.vin.size(); i++) {
        CTxIn& txin = mtx.vin[i];
        auto coin = coins.find(txin.prevout);
        if (coin == coins.end() || coin->second.IsSpent()) {
            input_errors[i] = "Input not found or already spent";
            continue;
        }
        const CScript& prevPubKey = coin->second.out.scriptPubKey;
        const CAmount& amount = coin->second.out.nValue;

        SignatureData sigdata = DataFromTransaction(mtx, i, coin->second.out);
        // Only sign SIGHASH_SINGLE if there's a corresponding output:
        if (!fHashSingle || (i < mtx.vout.size())) {
            ProduceSignature(*keystore, MutableTransactionSignatureCreator(&mtx, i, amount, nHashType), prevPubKey, sigdata);
        }

        UpdateInput(txin, sigdata);
----

The Pubkey and amount for each coin are retrieved, along with signature data for the coin.
`DataFromTransaction()` returns all the information needed to produce a signature for that coin as a `SignatureData` struct:

.src/script/sign.h#SignatureData
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
// This struct contains information from a transaction input and also contains signatures for that input.
// The information contained here can be used to create a signature and is also filled by ProduceSignature
// in order to construct final scriptSigs and scriptWitnesses.
struct SignatureData {
    bool complete = false; ///< Stores whether the scriptSig and scriptWitness are complete
    bool witness = false; ///< Stores whether the input this SigData corresponds to is a witness input
    CScript scriptSig; ///< The scriptSig of an input. Contains complete signatures or the traditional partial signatures format
    CScript redeem_script; ///< The redeemScript (if any) for the input
    CScript witness_script; ///< The witnessScript (if any) for the input. witnessScripts are used in P2WSH outputs.
    CScriptWitness scriptWitness; ///< The scriptWitness of an input. Contains complete signatures or the traditional partial signatures format. scriptWitness is part of a transaction input per BIP 144.
    std::map<CKeyID, SigPair> signatures; ///< BIP 174 style partial signatures for the input. May contain all signatures necessary for producing a final scriptSig or scriptWitness.
    std::map<CKeyID, std::pair<CPubKey, KeyOriginInfo>> misc_pubkeys;
    std::vector<CKeyID> missing_pubkeys; ///< KeyIDs of pubkeys which could not be found
    std::vector<CKeyID> missing_sigs; ///< KeyIDs of pubkeys for signatures which could not be found
    uint160 missing_redeem_script; ///< ScriptID of the missing redeemScript (if any)
    uint256 missing_witness_script; ///< SHA256 of the missing witnessScript (if any)

    SignatureData() {}
    explicit SignatureData(const CScript& script) : scriptSig(script) {}
    void MergeSignatureData(SignatureData sigdata);
};
----

With the signing `SigningProvider`, `scriptPubKey` and `sigdata` we are able to call `script/sign.cpp#ProduceSignature()` for signing on each individual input.
// TODO: Fact check!
Inputs by default will signed with a sighash of `SIGHASH_ALL`, but this can be re-configured as appropriate.

=== Producing a signature

Taking a look inside `ProduceSignature()` we can see how this works.

.src/script/sign.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
bool ProduceSignature(const SigningProvider& provider, const BaseSignatureCreator& creator, const CScript& fromPubKey, SignatureData& sigdata)
{
    if (sigdata.complete) return true;

    std::vector<valtype> result;
    TxoutType whichType;
    bool solved = SignStep(provider, creator, fromPubKey, result, whichType, SigVersion::BASE, sigdata);
    bool P2SH = false;
    CScript subscript;
    sigdata.scriptWitness.stack.clear();

    // ...
}
----

The function performs some initialisations before calling `script/sign.cpp#SignStep()` for the first time, with the `SigVersion` `SIGVERSION::BASE`.
`SignStep()` in turn calls `Solver()`, which is a function designed to detect the script type encoding of the `scriptPubKey`, and then return the detected type along with the parsed ``scriptPubKey``s/hashes.

If it is successful, `SignStep` continues by switching over the script type and, depending on the script type, calling the required signing operation and pushing the required elements onto the `sigdata` variable.

.script/sign.cpp
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
static bool SignStep(const SigningProvider& provider, const BaseSignatureCreator& creator, const CScript& scriptPubKey,
                     std::vector<valtype>& ret, TxoutType& whichTypeRet, SigVersion sigversion, SignatureData& sigdata)
{
    // ...
    whichTypeRet = Solver(scriptPubKey, vSolutions);

    switch (whichTypeRet) {
    case TxoutType::NONSTANDARD:
    case TxoutType::NULL_DATA:
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_UNKNOWN:
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V1_TAPROOT:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::PUBKEY:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::PUBKEYHASH:
        // ... 
    case TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::MULTISIG:
        // ... 
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH:
        // ...
    case TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH:
        // ... 
    } 
    // ...
}
----

Once `SignStep()` returns to `ProduceSignature()`, a second switch takes place.
If we are trying to produce a signature for P2SH, P2WPKH or P2WSH then the first pass from `SignStep()` will have been enough to detect the `TxOutType` and assemble the (redeem/witness) scripts, but not yet generate the entire signature in required format.
In order to get this signature, `SignStep()` is called again, this time with the assembled redeem/witness script and the appropriate `TxOutType`.

TIP: This recursion makes sense if you consider that, in order to sign for these script-encumbered inputs, we don't want to sign for the `scriptPubKey` that we are starting with but for the {redeem|witness} script instead.

We can see this switch in `ProduceSignature()`:

.src/script/sign.cpp#ProduceSignature()
[source,cpp,options=nowrap]
----
    if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH)
    {
        // Solver returns the subscript that needs to be evaluated;
        // the final scriptSig is the signatures from that
        // and then the serialized subscript:
        subscript = CScript(result[0].begin(), result[0].end());
        sigdata.redeem_script = subscript;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, subscript, result, whichType, SigVersion::BASE, sigdata) && whichType != TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH;
        P2SH = true;
    }

    if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH)
    {
        CScript witnessscript;
        // This puts the parsed pubkeys from the first pass into the witness script
        witnessscript << OP_DUP << OP_HASH160 << ToByteVector(result[0]) << OP_EQUALVERIFY << OP_CHECKSIG;
        TxoutType subType;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, witnessscript, result, subType, SigVersion::WITNESS_V0, sigdata);
        sigdata.scriptWitness.stack = result;
        sigdata.witness = true;
        result.clear();
    }
    else if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH)
    {
        CScript witnessscript(result[0].begin(), result[0].end());
        sigdata.witness_script = witnessscript;
        TxoutType subType;
        solved = solved && SignStep(provider, creator, witnessscript, result, subType, SigVersion::WITNESS_V0, sigdata) && subType != TxoutType::SCRIPTHASH && subType != TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH && subType != TxoutType::WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH;
        result.push_back(std::vector<unsigned char>(witnessscript.begin(), witnessscript.end()));
        sigdata.scriptWitness.stack = result;
        sigdata.witness = true;
        result.clear();
    } else if (solved && whichType == TxoutType::WITNESS_UNKNOWN) {
        sigdata.witness = true;
    }
----

Finally, if all went well the signature is checked with xref:validating-scripts.adoc#verifyscript[`VerifyScript()`].

=== Creating a signature

TODO: dig into `CreateSig()`
